[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Dear colleagues, we have the Prime Minister of Bulgaria, Nikolay Denkov, with us today. Prime Minister, welcome to the European Parliament. Thank you for being here. A special welcome also to Mariya Gabriel, the Deputy Prime Minister, whom we know so well in this House. Prime Minister, this is the first time you are here since we have seen the conclusion of the critical governmental rotation agreement in Bulgaria that finally managed to break through the political deadlock and gave Bulgaria an important perspective, stability and European outlook, and for that we are grateful. Sixteen years of European Union membership have been transformative for Bulgaria and for Europe. It has given new impetus for businesses, for industry, for science, for technology. It has brought opportunities for people and for young people, in particular. It has more brought more social and judicial benefits and reforms, because EU membership promotes equality, social justice, democracy and the rule of law. And in times of geopolitical change, these European values must be defended. Dear Prime Minister, I would like to particularly thank Bulgaria for its support for Ukraine, for providing military aid, for providing political support. Europe is stronger thanks to Bulgaria and your government, and will be stronger still when you join the eurozone and finally take your rightful place in the Schengen area. Next June, 6.8 million Bulgarians will be called upon to choose the 17 elected Members of the European Parliament who will represent them here. We must work together to make sure people understand why they must vote – why it is important. Their voice matters for the European Union and Bulgaria’s future, and we must keep listening and keep delivering. Prime Minister, the floor is yours.
[EN] Nikolay  | Denkov said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Bulgaria – Dear Madam President of the European Parliament, Dear Chairmen of the parliamentary groups in the European Parliament, Dear Members of the European Parliament, Dear Mr. Secretary of State, Dear Madam Commissioner, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is an honour for me to stand before you, the representatives of a united Europe, in this beautiful and symbolic city. On this day 105 years ago, just days after the armistice that ended the First World War, French troops entered Strasbourg. And tomorrow, 79 years ago, General Philippe Leclerc and the 2nd Armored Division of the Free French Army, supported by the Allies, liberated Strasbourg from Nazi occupation. Strasbourg is a city with a rich and turbulent history. It was part of the Roman Empire, then it was within the borders of the Frankish Empire and the Holy Roman Empire, for a short time it was an independent free city, and in the last two centuries it has passed continuously between France and Germany. Etymology interprets Strasbourg as a city of roads. In the past, more soldiers and tanks moved along these roads than merchants and goods, more gunshots and groans of wounded and dying people echoed along them than songs of traveling musicians. In the past, being at a crossroads was often a curse, not an advantage. In the past, these roads divided people, today they connect them. In the past, the sky over Strasbourg was torn by the ominous howl of shells, fighter jets and bombers, today passenger planes, colorful balloons and colorful children's kites fly there. In the past, Strasbourg was often the "apple of discord", today Strasbourg is the "white dove of peace" and the symbol is here. In the past, Julius Caesar, Charlemagne, Charles V, Napoleon Bonaparte, Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin tried to unite Europe through wars of conquest and subjugate other nations by force of arms. And the more cruel and ruthless these wars were, the shorter their successes were. Today, for the first time in its centuries-old history, Europe is peacefully united in an equal union of independent states, in which the basic values ​​are solidarity, freedom, democracy, equality before the law, the rule of law, respect for human dignity and the fundamental rights of all citizens. And in Strasbourg you meet, the Parliament of a united Europe, guarantor and guardian of these values. Distinguished Members of the European Parliament, my homeland is one of the oldest countries in Europe, having retained the name Bulgaria from its establishment in 681 to the present day. In its thousand-year history, it was forcibly annexed for 167 years to Byzantium and for nearly five centuries to the Ottoman Empire. But our country managed to rise again thanks to the figures of the Bulgarian Revival Paisii Hilendarski, Georgi Rakovski, Lyuben Karavelov, Hristo Botev and many others. One of them, Vasil Levski, whom the Bulgarian people call the Apostle of Freedom, is the spiritual inspirer of an independent and European Bulgaria. As early as 1872, he proclaimed that Bulgaria should be, I quote, "a democratic republic in which all nationalities, Bulgarians, Turks, Jews, etc. will be equal in every respect and all will live under one common law, which will be chosen by the majority of all nationalities. Being equal with other European nations depends on our own joint forces." It is so relevant today that there is nothing more to add. In its most recent history, Bulgaria has been the subject of continuous attempts at domination, some of them successful, by the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union. Unfortunately, these Great Russian appetites continue today and our country is the subject of targeted hybrid attacks. The secret services and Putin's propaganda take advantage of our country's economic and raw material ties with Russia, as well as the historical and cultural ties between our peoples, to divide and oppose our society to Russophiles and Euro-Atlantics. Therefore, Bulgaria's full membership in the EU and NATO is the greatest guarantee for the continuation of the democratic and European path of development of our homeland. Therefore, we must complete our European integration by joining Schengen and the Eurozone. I take this opportunity to warmly thank all the European deputies who supported Bulgaria for Schengen and thus help us overcome a European injustice. Despite the challenging historical path of our country, Bulgaria has always been an integral part not only of the military achievements of Europe (let us recall the stopping of the invasion of the Arab Caliphate in front of Constantinople by Khan Tervel in 718), but also of European culture and enlightenment - probably the most striking example is the Cyrillic alphabet, created by St. Clement of Ohrid at the end of the 9th century based on the Glagolitic alphabet of St. Cyril and Methodius. Our aspiration is for modern Bulgaria to also make its worthy and significant contribution to the development of the EU. It is understandable that in most of the recently joined countries, especially the poorer ones, there is an attitude to perceive the EU primarily as a source of generous funds, aid and a place for better-paid work. We are convinced that this stereotype of thinking must be broken, so let me paraphrase the famous thought of President John F. Kennedy: Ask not what the European Union can do for your country, ask what your country can do for the European Union. Honourable Members of the European Parliament, unfortunately, the EU is not an isolated island of peace and prosperity. For almost two years now, a devastating war has been raging on its border, in which Russian aggressors are trying to crush the desire of the Ukrainian people to live in an independent, free and democratic state. No less bloody is the renewed armed conflict in the Middle East, triggered by Hamas' brutal terrorist attack on civilians, women and children, and Israel's large-scale military response, in which thousands of Palestinians, including many women and children, have already died. The prospects for the conflict to expand and become regional are not to be underestimated, especially given the unstable situation in Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Yemen, as well as the regimes of the ayatollahs in Iran and the Taliban in Afghanistan. The situation in the Far East is also worrying, where North Korea continues to challenge the world community with its nuclear program for military purposes and the regular launch of missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads. The ever-growing tension between China and Taiwan also poses a great risk. The situation in Africa south of Europe is also unstable. In recent years, in several countries in Central and West Africa - Gabon, Niger, Chad, Guinea, Mali and Burkina Faso - democratically elected governments have been overthrown by the military. It is worrying that some of these coups were carried out with the decisive help of mercenaries from the Wagner PMC and led to the coming to power of pro-Russian regimes. Add to this the ongoing civil wars in Libya, Sudan and Ethiopia, the anarchy in Somalia and the numerous terrorist attacks in Tunisia, Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria and other countries, and we see an extremely worrying world, gripped by instability in much of the continent south of the EU. We cannot turn a blind eye to these geopolitical challenges. To cope with them, Europe must be strong, and to be strong, it must be united. The two main ideological and political currents in the EU, conservatism and liberalism, can and must develop not in sharp opposition, but in mutual understanding and cooperation. The borders of our countries, the history and traditions of our peoples, Christianity and the family are conservative values ​​that the modern world continues to need. The borders of Europe, which have become so visible in recent years due to the migrant crisis and the war in Ukraine, are a natural summary of this conservative value. But the world is changing and becoming more global, liberal ideas are making their way not only in the economy, but also in politics, culture and international cooperation. The rights of women, minorities, the different, immigrants are now an integral part of liberal democracy. We must weed out the extremes and unite around the best conservative and liberal values ​​for the sake of the future of Europe. We must fight hatred as a political tool and polarization as a political platform for gaining power. Only in this way will we regain the trust of citizens and move forward. A united and strong Europe must play a more active role in international relations as an influential and strong mediator and guarantor of peace. At the same time, the EU must strengthen its ties with its strategic NATO allies and enhance its defense capabilities in cooperation between countries within the Union, including carefully considering the idea of ​​creating a single European army. Distinguished Members of the European Parliament, given the complex international situation, EU enlargement is becoming increasingly important. Bulgaria has always been a strong supporter and advocate of the accession of the Western Balkans to the EU. At the same time, we believe that the countries of this region, which is critical for stability and peace in Europe, should be admitted when they meet all the necessary requirements. Accession should be based on real achievements that reflect the real desire of the candidates to develop as an integral part of the European family, and not on the result of political calculations. We welcome the decision of the EC to recommend the start of accession negotiations with Ukraine and Moldova. We hope that Georgia will also be included in this group in the near future. The EU undoubtedly needs to strengthen its institutions and enhance its capacity for enlargement, but we believe that this important process and the work on the accession of new countries should go in parallel and simultaneously. The decision to apply the rule of law reports to the newly admitted countries is a good guarantee of control, and that the countries themselves feel assessed according to a measure applied to the Member States. All previous enlargements of the EU have shown that the increase in the number of member states does not reduce the strength of the Union. On the contrary, it is becoming more and more powerful. Dear Members of the European Parliament, today in Europe there are increasingly noticeable signs of fatigue from the war in Ukraine and voices are being raised against helping the Ukrainian people and Ukrainian refugees. More and more Europeans are asking themselves why we should bear the burdens and hardships of a distant war between two countries that are not part of the EU. Wouldn't it be better to make some concessions to Putin and end the war? The Latin maxim Pax potior bello and its modern version are quoted: "Even the worst peace is better than the best war". But it is also good to recall a thought by the American philosopher George Santayana, quoted by Winston Churchill in connection with the Munich Agreement of 1938: "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it." It is a sad fact how the attempts to appease Hitler with continuous concessions ended. The same is true today. Putin's war against Ukraine is actually Putin's war against Europe. By helping Ukraine, we are helping Europe. By defending Ukraine, we are defending Europe. Otherwise, tomorrow Moldova could find itself in Ukraine's position, the day after tomorrow the Baltic republics, then Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and other European countries. Distinguished Members of the European Parliament, a direct consequence of the wars and the unstable global environment is the increasing wave of immigration. Due to its great attractiveness as a place to work and live, the vast majority of those seeking safe haven are heading to Europe. But the EU is not able to accept an unlimited number of immigrants without jeopardizing the normal functioning of its institutions. Moreover, the integration of a large part of the immigrants already admitted is slow and unsatisfactory, as evidenced by a number of incidents, attacks and bombings carried out by radicalized elements, many of whom were born, raised and educated in EU countries. We need a new strategy and approach that clearly distinguishes refugees from wars from economic immigrants. The EU must do everything possible to facilitate the admission of refugees and take all necessary measures to stop and discourage economic migrants. In addition, the necessary balance must be found between solidarity and real opportunities, both for individual countries and for the European Union as a whole. We hope that all these issues and challenges will be taken into account in the new Pact on Migration and Asylum. In this regard, I would like to remind you that Bulgaria has fulfilled all the requirements for its admission to the Schengen area and any further delay is unacceptable and demotivating for our country and its citizens. We understand that the very functioning of the Schengen Agreement is currently facing serious problems and many countries are resuming border checks, but we do not believe that this can be an argument for not accepting Bulgaria and Romania. With our two countries in the Schengen area, Europe's borders will be better protected and Europe will be stronger. Honorable Members of the European Parliament, finally, allow me to remind you of a touching story about war, aid and solidarity. On March 5, 2022, a few days after the Russian troops invaded Ukraine, the following message was published on the official Facebook page of the Slovak Border Police: "A barely 11-year-old boy from Zaporizhia crossed the border crossing from Ukraine to Slovakia on foot. With a plastic bag, a passport tied around his neck and a phone number written on his hand. He came all alone because his mother had to stay in Ukraine." “My name is Hassan, I am 11 years old. I have two sisters and three brothers,” the child introduces himself to the astonished border guards. The journey from his home to the Slovak border takes four days, after his mother sends him to the train station. “Our family has some experience,” the quote continues. “We fled from Putin’s army when we lived in Syria. I was 12 then. Our father was killed and we had to move to Ukraine to my mother’s family. So, eight years have passed and again Russia, again Putin’s army,” says the older brother Zakaria, a student in Slovakia, whose phone number is written on Hassan’s hand. “I want to thank all the Slovak border guards and volunteers. I cannot leave my mother alone, she is immobile, so I took my son to the station and put him on the train. Please save our Ukrainian children and give them safety,” adds the boy’s mother, Yulia Vladimirovna. “Tears in our eyes... This is the greatest hero of the previous night,” concludes the publication of the Slovak border police. The child traveled 1,200 km, first by train and finally on foot. All alone, day and night in the harsh Ukrainian winter, hungry, freezing, scared and pursued by the wailing of sirens and the roar of shells. There may have been tears in the eyes of the border police, but not in the eyes of the child. As can be seen from the published photos, the little hero even tries to smile. This is the tragedy of the people about whom we read as statistics in various media publications. Distinguished Members of the European Parliament, I began my speech with the symbolism of today's and tomorrow's dates. Allow me to conclude with two more significant events that occurred on these dates. On this day 133 years ago, the hero of the French resistance against the Nazi occupation, the first prime minister of free post-war France, the first president of the Fifth Republic, General Charles de Gaulle, was born. And on November 23, 1959, President de Gaulle delivered his famous speech “From the Atlantic to the Urals,” in which he expressed his confidence that one day all of Europe from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ural mountain range would be united. Back then, at the height of the Cold War, when the Iron Curtain divided Europe “from Szczecin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic,” de Gaulle’s statement sounded absurd. It sounds even more absurd today, in the midst of the hot war in Ukraine, when hundreds of European men, women, and children are dying every day. But one day, when today will become yesterday and tomorrow will be today, when Putin's and Lukashenko's will be just a shameful page in the history of their countries, and our children will not be forced to flee the war alone, with a passport tied around their necks and a phone number written on their little hands, then this dream can come true. It is our responsibility to ensure that a free, democratic and united Europe remains!
[EN] Andrey | Kovatchev said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group. – Madam President, Madam Commissioner, colleagues, Welcome, esteemed Mr Denkov, esteemed Ms Gabriel! I am very happy that you are among us today. Bulgaria has a pro-European, democratic, predictable government, of which you are the Prime Minister, mainly thanks to the statesmanlike behavior of the GERB party and its chairman Mr Borisov, thanks to our desire for Bulgaria to get out of the trap of hatred and chaos of the last three years. Especially today, as you outlined this extremely worrying situation all over the world, it is very important for every country in the European Union to have a predictable, pro-European and effective government. Unfortunately, the serious role of your party has led to a major delay in European funding for the Bulgarian economy, the suspension of important infrastructure projects, which has led to serious damage and missed benefits for business and citizens. I hope that the unclear geopolitical behavior in your previous coalition with the pro-Russian forces will not be repeated in the Sofia City Council. GERB came to your aid again in the second round and you did not lose the capital. For us, a democratic and European Bulgaria is above all, even above party interests. We are and will continue to be the guarantor of this as the main stabilizing political factor in Bulgaria. I also hope that our joint efforts for a democratic public environment, culture and education will be successful and that the remnants and propaganda artifacts of the totalitarian dictatorship will find their place in museums and textbooks. I hope that the signing of memorandums with funds close to Russian oligarchs will also remain in the past, as well as this strange defense of the derogation for the import of crude Russian oil from the refinery close to the Kremlin, Lukoil, through which Bulgaria fills the Kremlin's military budget. I would like to conclude with gratitude, especially to Ms. Gabriel, for her efforts to overcome the obstacles facing Bulgaria in our admission to the Schengen area, as well as in our preparation for the eurozone. I would also like to thank Ms. Gabriel for the exceptionally good work we have done in achieving our membership in the UN Human Rights Council. This is a very good signal for Bulgaria. Mr. Denkov, Ms. Gabriel and of course, Ms. Ivanova, the signals of understanding between the pro-European democratic forces in Bulgaria over the past few days are very encouraging. Today's vote in the Bulgarian Parliament is also such a signal. We have a lot of work ahead of us and I am convinced that with joint efforts, Mr. Denkov, we will be able to achieve even more success for the European development of Bulgaria - a respected and worthy member of the European Union, a more effective, more united European Union that works for the physical, social and economic security of its citizens.
[EN] Petar | Vitanov said from the S-D that on behalf of the S&D Group. – Commissioner, Prime Minister, welcome to the European Parliament. You are coming on a day when, albeit indicatively, proposals for future changes to the Treaties of the European Union will be voted on, including decisions related to enlargement, and I therefore take this opportunity to ask: what is the position of the Bulgarian government on the issue of qualified majority and unanimity when it comes to enlargement? And since you have already mentioned that you support the Commission's proposal to open negotiations with Moldova and Ukraine, how will this affect the enlargement process in the Western Balkans and how do you see this process, so that the countries of the Western Balkans do not lose their incentives on their integration path?
[EN] Stéphane | Séjourné said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, dear colleagues. Thank you, Prime Minister, for this very pro-European speech. Your government, following on from the previous one, has breathed a new wind into Bulgaria, particularly on European aspects. This is the purpose of my speech today. This wind is European, as I said, it is progressive. Above all, it is welcome, and it is this new energy that makes Bulgaria a solid European ally, particularly in its concrete support for Ukraine in the face of the Russian aggressor. My European political family in any case supports this political direction and this change. I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the spirit of responsibility of your party, which also led to the formation of a coalition despite the differences, as we saw just now, in the interest of the country, and above all in the interest of Europe. There has often been, in these institutions, a form of fatalism regarding certain difficulties Bulgaria faces within the Bloc in the fight against corruption, in the fight against global warming, or in the unity of the continent from an international perspective. But, it must be said, the reforms of your government, of your predecessor, have mitigated much of this criticism. Today we are working together, with a common vision, a European vision, that of a green Europe, that of an innovative Europe, that of a Europe in solidarity with Ukraine, that of a sovereign Europe, that of a Europe founded on the rule of law. And in this Europe of tomorrow, Bulgaria has its place. A leading place, particularly in the perspective of enlargement to the Western Balkans. You know that in my group, we have MEPs who are very committed to the issue, but we also have with us European leaders who must play their part. And it is time, finally, for Bulgaria, with its Romanian neighbor, to enter the Schengen area. We cannot disappoint the hopes of the Bulgarians, and I also appeal to my colleagues in the EPP. Mr. Deputy, as you know, when it comes to Renew, we have done our part. We have convinced our allies to take this decision to support the Bulgarians in the Schengen area, and the EPP must also convince its allies, and I am thinking in particular of the Austrians, who are still leading this principled opposition today. Mr. Prime Minister, with Renew Europe, you still have this path, you will always have an ally, and we will support you in these efforts.
[EN] Philippe | Lamberts said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group . – Madam President, Mr Prime Minister, we were born actually – Mr Prime Minister, I know that Mariya Gabriel is more attractive to you than me, because she’s your partner in government! – we were born actually six months apart. And when we were born, we were separated, you and I, by an iron curtain. And it remains to me a deep joy to see that our two countries are now part of the same Union. And it’s a Union, as you said, of choice of freedom and based on rule of law. And like you, and maybe you didn’t say it explicitly, but I really resent when some European politicians are comparing the European Union to the new Soviet Union or to a renewed Third Reich, where we would be submitted by force. We all chose freely to be part of that Union, and that remains a source of pride. And let no one believe that the European Union is a repetition of the past failures in Europe. The second thing I want to say is that I totally agree with you when you say that what is happening in Ukraine is basically the defence of the values on which the European Union has been built. This is our struggle, and I must say that yes, it entails efforts from the Members of the European Union to help Ukraine, but frankly speaking, they are putting their lives on the line. We are just putting part of our wealth to help them, and I think that’s the least we can do. The third thing where I agree with you is that yes, the European Union is a union freely chosen, but it has to be merit-based. And there again, when the merits are there, the decision should follow. Yes, Bulgaria and Romania must be part of Schengen. And for citizens this is probably, with the common currency, the most emblematic meaning of what it means to be part of the European Union. So full support for that. I will finish with the values you mentioned a lot, the conservative and liberal values. And then the green in me said, ‘hang on one second, yes, the conservatives and the liberals have brought a lot to Europe, but I think that there’s more to European political diversity and values diversity than just those two families’. I think that the left has brought these values of social justice, and that lies at the heart of the European Union. And I would finish with the thing that was most absent from your speech. Well, you know, if you and I and our kids and grandkids will live in the 21st century and beyond, well, it will be because we have been able to protect this planet as our common home. And indeed that lies as well at the heart of the values of the European Union, making sure that indeed, the planet on which we live will be welcoming us for generations to come.
[EN] Angel | Dzhambazki said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR Group. – Madam President, Mr Prime Minister, colleagues, Mr Prime Minister, you began your introduction with brief historical references, which, however, from my point of view, were quite, quite partial. Let me remind you that around today's dates in the past, the Neuilly Dictate and the illegal occupation of the western Bulgarian outskirts, the black border, took place with the consent of the state of France, which you are thanking today. With tacit consent, violation of treaties, division of settlements, persecution of people, only the intervention of President Wilson saved the Bulgarian nation from division. This must also be remembered, it must be said especially here, in Strasbourg, because no one benefits from partial quoting of history. My impression, Mr Prime Minister, is that you were wrong with President Kennedy's epitaph on his tombstone. You said, we need to see what we are doing for Europe, for the European Union. You are a Bulgarian Prime Minister, not a high-ranking European official. You should ask yourself what the Bulgarian government is doing for Bulgarian citizens. Every morning in front of the mirror you should ask yourself this, because Bulgarian citizens are your superiors and employers, not European bureaucrats. These are the important things. Otherwise you said that you see white balloons, that you see beautiful colorful kites and colorful balloons, white doves. However, Bulgarian citizens probably see high prices for fuel, transport, etc. This is because Bulgaria is not in Schengen, and Bulgaria is not in Schengen, Mr. Denkov, because the economic interests of some European countries are in the way, they are economic. Bulgaria has fulfilled all its obligations, but some people are fulfilling their economic interests and you should tell them that. You are the Prime Minister. You should say in the European Council, Bulgarian citizens cannot suffer because of your economic interests. There cannot be high prices, Bulgarians cannot stand on the outside. We cannot be second-hand people. It can't be. This is not European, this is not European and it's not right. Everything else is hypocrisy. Everything else is a double standard. We can't afford this. You are not a representative of a tourism company. You are the Prime Minister. You have to pound the table and speak important words to these people, so that they understand you. You also cited our support for Ukraine. It is important and must be there, of course. But when we provide support to people in trouble and need, you have to demand the support of these people for Macedonia, for the Bulgarian cause in Macedonia. Because you didn't mention a word about the repressions, the violence, the denial of the right to self-determination. Colleague Sejourne, you talk about how you will support us, but there are people in your group who pretend not to see the violence against Bulgarians in Macedonia. Explain it to them. They are in your group. You are applying for Renew. There, your bosses will be the MRF, they are your bosses in Bulgaria and they will be your bosses here. There's nothing wrong with that. That's how you chose it and that's how you arranged it. No, that's not a particular problem, but still tell them, there is violence against Bulgarians in Macedonia. This is not European. The right to self-determination, the right to national self-esteem, the right to national dignity – these are European values, the European values. Your diplomats are behind you. Tell them, when they defend these cases in Strasbourg, to be more active, to truly defend the Bulgarian cause. Because these are the important things. Ah! The western outskirts, we talked about the occupation, about the Neuilly Dictatorship. There is a poet there, his name is Ivan Nikolov. This month, on the eighth, on Archangel's Day, on the day of the occupation, in Kosovo, the Serbian authorities and civilian police were with the poet. They are searching him. Call him, see this person, support him. Its right to self-determination has been violated by the Serbian authorities, pro-Belgrade, pro-Kremlin. This is also happening in Macedonia, this is being denied to the Bulgarians and this cannot continue in the same way. We have already talked about Schengen. You were going to check the subsidies, but check them, the agricultural ones. The difference in subsidies is what makes Bulgarian agricultural producers poorer, less competitive. This must be checked and this must be put here. This must be discussed and must be put on the agenda. Carriers, you have again talked a lot about what is happening in the international environment in Chad, Mali and Burkina Faso. These are important things, but in my opinion, the agenda of the Bulgarian Prime Minister and the focus should be on the interests of Bulgarian citizens and how they, Bulgarian citizens, can have access to the single market, to travel, to European perspectives and horizons, and not be second-hand citizens. So, on a personal level, I wish you good health, but politically, you will need a lot of firmness, a lot of courage, a lot of character, and a lot of political backbone to defend the Bulgarian interest. The Bulgarian interest in the formats in which you must represent it and you must defend it.
[EN] Gunnar | Beck said from the ID that on behalf of the ID Group . – Madam President, honourable Prime Minister, allow me to congratulate you on your decision to order an investigation into the 2023 Bulgarian-Turkish gas deal concluded by your predecessor. The Southern Gas Corridor, we all know, is used to launder Russian gas via Turkey, and to circumvent EU sanctions, which so far have had little effect on the Russian economy. The European Commission knows this full well, as its EUR 400 million subsidy agreement with the Gas Corridor contains a secrecy clause, which prohibits any probe into the provenance of the gas. In other words, former Prime Minister Borisov was given a free licence to launder Russian gas in return for his loyal support for Mrs Merkel and her party throughout his years in the Council. Moreover, under the gas deal, Bulgargaz has to pay Turkey’s state owned gas company Botaş an annual service fee of EUR 2 billion. Northern European citizens are paying cohesion funds to Bulgaria, which Bulgaria then appears to be handing over to Erdoğan. EU policy, it seems, is riddled with hypocrisy. On Bulgarian accession to Schengen, I agree with the position taken by the Austrian and Dutch governments. We need to reform Schengen before we can talk about Schengen expansion. There’s also the regrettable issue of Bulgarian officials selling Schengen visas to illegal migrants. Of course, the main culprit here is Germany, which is creating pull factors for migrants to enter via southern Europe, and resisting credible rules for pushbacks and comprehensive repatriation of illegal migrants. We therefore call on the Bulgarian Government to help us in the fight for ambitious migration reform in the EU. Then I can’t imagine your application finally to join the Schengen system would pose too many problems.
[EN] Nikolaj | Villumsen said from the The Left that on behalf of the The Left Group . – Madam President, Commissioner, and Prime Minister, this is Europe. A Europe where we stood united in solidarity with Ukraine after the brutal attack by Putin. A Europe that has imposed sanctions against Putin for his grave violations against international law and human rights. A Europe that actively has engaged in making sure that war crimes in Ukraine will be prosecuted. Dear colleagues, this is a Europe I’m proud of. But when we look at the horrors unfolding in Gaza, and the response of the European Union, we have clearly failed. We stood united in condemning the brutal terror attack of Hamas. Good. We have stood united in a call for immediately releasing of all hostages. Good. But we have failed in protecting the innocent children and people of Gaza. They have died by the thousands. Those alive are struggling to survive. If they live, they will be traumatised. This is Europe. This Europe has for years failed to speak up against Israeli violations of international law; failed to speak out against the human-rights violations that Palestinians in the occupied territories daily suffer; failed to pressure for a sustainable two-state solution, where both Israelis and Palestinians can live in peace and prosperity, side by side. Dear colleagues, dear Prime Minister, Europe can do better. Let this Europe be a Europe of strong values. A Europe that speak out for international laws in all matter. A Europe that speak out against killing of civilians, whoever they are. A Europe that speak out for peace and prosperity, for both the people of Israel and Palestine.
[EN] Tatjana | Ždanoka said from the NI that – Madam President, honourable Prime Minister Denkov and Ms Gabriel, yes, I want to start with also acknowledging what Philippe told. I was a little bit surprised when you spoke about conservatism and liberal values, not mentioning social values while President Metsola spoke about. But nevertheless, I have to remind that the Bulgarian Presidency, when it took place in the beginning of 2018, supported our proposed guidelines for employment policies in the Member States. I was a reporter at that time and thanks to that, the directive on minimum wage appeared. But our proposal was more ambitious. And what do you think about the proposal of minimum income for the EU? And I have to remind you that Bulgaria is the State at the bottom of the list of minimum wage. Smaller minimum wages than my country as well. Another question is about rights and about rights of minorities. You spoke about Vasil Levski mentioning Bulgarians, Jews and Turks as equals. But what happens now? What do you think about the rights of minorities, especially the rights to participate in election campaigns in their own language? We know the decision of the European Court where Bulgaria lost, and the same problem exists in my country, Latvia, as well. Abolishing education, abolishing rights to speak in pre-election campaigns in minority languages – it is not the Europe you mentioned as a Europe uniting. ‘United in diversity’ means not only unity of 27 Member States, but also of all languages of all cultures within European Union.
[EN] Paulo | Rangel said from the PPE that – Madam President, dear Prime Minister, dear Commissioner Ivanova, I would like to say that Bulgaria is a country whose history is intertwined with Europe, and it is really in the origin of the DNA of Europe, from its ancient times to modern times. Your country gave us the alphabet of Saints Cyril and Methodius, and you are speaking, in a very clear way, the language of freedom after 1990. So it’s a pleasure – and it’s really something that completes the European project – to have Bulgaria in the European Union and also in NATO. And I also have to congratulate you and Mariya Gabriel for the return of political stability and responsible behaviour – a clear pro-European government. And I would like to say here that Mariya Gabriel – a very, very committed pro-European – is a very important actor of your executive. Then let me tell you that I understand the difficulties in the external landscape of a country that has its coast in the Black Sea – so close to the war – but at the same time, it is very important to call on you to step up your efforts to end fossil fuel dependence on Russia. Could you clarify how you plan to close this loophole on Russian oil? We are here as the European Union to support you, but we need also your efforts in this field. And let me tell you that we are also a bit worried with the European funds, because the instability of the last two years paralysed the development and the implementation of these European funds. So what is the plan for the next two years where you have a very, very tiny time? And only to say: we are totally with Bulgaria and with Romania on your Schengen accession. And we, as the EPP, we already condemn the EPP government that is blocking that. I hope that liberals with the Netherlands would do the same, especially after these elections.
[EN] Victor | Negrescu said from the S-D that – Madam President, dear Prime Minister, dear Deputy Prime Minister, Romania and Bulgaria deserve to be accepted to the Schengen Area, and this needs to happen fully, and it needs to happen now. It is unacceptable for our two countries to be left out, even though we fulfil all the Schengen criteria, and we have efficiently protected the European borders for so many years. We live, dear Prime Minister, in a difficult region, but we have always defended European values and the cohesion of our Union. We did that during difficult times in the Western Balkans. We helped build a safe Black Sea region, while maintaining a good relationship with Turkey, Georgia and the countries in the Black Sea. We are proving it once more today with the support provided to Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova. Romania and Bulgaria are not second-rank Members, and people should stop looking at us this way. That is why I call upon the EU leaders to support our accession to Schengen all the way: by having a vote by the end of the year, in order to show that respecting the rules in the EU pays off.
[EN] Ilhan | Kyuchyuk said from the Renew that – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, colleagues, I have participated in such debates many times and they have all ended with the same conclusion. A debate on Bulgaria's domestic policy. Let's make sure that this debate is not about Bulgaria's domestic policy, but rather a debate on the future of Europe, in which I want Bulgaria to participate very actively and to use this pro-European majority for the necessary reforms, which are so urgent both in a national context and in a European one. If there is one issue on which there has been consensus for years between the European Commission, the MEPs, and the Bulgarian national elite, it is the topic of Schengen. By the end of 2023, if Bulgaria and Romania do not join Schengen, we are taking a great risk as a European Union. We risk undermining the foundations of everything we have achieved over these more than 70 years. Why? Because Bulgarian and Romanian citizens cannot continue to be treated in the same way as they have been treated in recent years, because they are no different from German, Austrian, Dutch and other citizens. Because the Bulgarian economy is suffering enormous damage. And if we want to have a Union that is based on a strong economy that is competitive, a Union that relies on the single market, Bulgaria and Romania must be part of Schengen. Another topic that seems very important to me. I would like, Mr. Prime Minister, for Bulgaria to be ambitious with its ideas, with its plans, with its proposals that it makes in the European institutions. We cannot have an EU that wants to have a strong foreign policy if we continue to make decisions in this way. It will always be too little, too slow. 27 countries come together, make decisions and how they make them, with months, with postponements, with bargaining. There are a number of initiatives, including from countries that are on our side, so to speak, to change the way of decision-making. To move from unanimity to a qualified majority. I know what these nationalist forces will say to me. Ilhan Küçük wants to push forward the interests of the Western Balkans. This has never been a topic. The topic of enlargement, the enlargement policy has not been part of this debate. So let us be ambitious and responsible for the future of the EU, because it is a union of all of us.
[EN] Reinhard | Bütikofer said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, Prime Minister, Commission, colleagues, I want to thank you, Prime Minister Denkov, for talking to us and with us. You dwelt quite extensively on historic issues and you spoke about the European spirit of Bulgaria that your national hero emphasised, and I’m sure all of us loved it. You quoted JFK, and I like that too. So let me ask you this question: what will Bulgaria do for the EU with regard to EU enlargement? You didn’t mention the name of your neighbouring country, North Macedonia, whose access so far has been blocked by Bulgaria. In vague terms only you seemed to question the real will of candidate countries. Can anybody question the real European will of North Macedonia, a country that even went as far as changing its name in order to open the door to Europe? After Mr Dzhambazki spewed hate against North Macedonia here, I would like to ask you, Prime Minister, to be more specific. What will you do to help open the door for North Macedonia? I believe Bulgaria must avoid hampering the accession process with overhyped national blockades.
[EN] Andrey | Slabakov said from the ECR that – Madam President, Academician Denkov, Mrs Gabriel, Madam Commissioner, I was thinking of talking about culture and education, but as things are going, I will start talking about Schengen, I am the Vice-Chair of the Committee on Culture and Education. I just want to tell the people who think that Bulgaria should not enter Schengen that all illegal migrant channels are financed by the following countries, if they do not know it: Austria, the Netherlands, France and Germany. These are not Bulgarian channels for transporting migrants. The other thing I want to say to my colleague from the Greens is that when they beat and kill Bulgarians, they are forbidden to self-determine themselves, do not tell me that Dzambazki is using hate speech. Just understand what is happening in Macedonia. And now on the issue of education, which interests me extremely much. Unfortunately, in Bulgaria the budget for culture is 0.4%, and the one for education is 4.1%. To me, this seems extremely small. Some time ago, we voted in our committee that the minimum budget for culture should be 2%. So if we go at this pace, Bulgaria will reach it in about 150 years, in my opinion. I assume that you have some kind of action plan, because in my opinion, culture and education are extremely important and must be a mandatory priority.
[EN] Harald | Vilimsky said from the ID that – Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, in German-speaking countries we have the saying “In the evening the lazy one becomes industrious”, and that is precisely what comes to mind when I look at the decisions taken in the recent past, what we have to decide today and in the past few days, and what you still intend to decide. But before I come to this political insanity, madness, and, in my view, completely misguided measures, a word about the past of this “This is Europe” debate. When we began this term of office and you brought chaos across the entire continent with an insane lockdown policy, when you produced bankruptcies, unemployment, and record debts with this lockdown policy, sometimes causing gigantic psychological damage to some people, when you kept the European Public Prosecutor’s Office busy with ordering 1.8 billion vaccine doses, and now a large proportion of these vaccine doses are rotting – there we have the first capital failure of the European Union. It continued with the Ukraine/Russia conflict, where with eleven or twelve waves of sanctions the European Union, this House and a majority here only shot themselves in the foot and produced massive price increases, massive inflation, unemployment, bankruptcies and so on. That is the wrong way to go. And now, after we have to take stock of these two completely failed measures, we are moving on to one insanity after the other. A Green Deal which sounds nice but is in reality leading to Europe completely losing its competitiveness, to us developing an energy and business sector with e-mobility and the nuclear industry, which is political insanity, where you decide with a majority that insects can be added to our food. It is baffling to think of the direction this European Union is heading in. And if you ask the question: This is Europe? , my answer is quite clear: this European Union is going completely in the wrong direction, and I hope that the elections next year, on 6 to 9 June, will mark a turnaround towards a good, free and peaceful Europe… (The President cut off the speaker.)
[EN] Clare | Daly said from the The Left that – Madam President, Prime Minister, thanks for being here and for the meetings you had with us and your cabinet and your President on the recent rule of law monitoring visit to Bulgaria. Bulgaria, of course, is the oldest independent country in Europe – a magnificent place and people. But for all the hope that EU membership would help transform it, the truth is that it remains the poorest country in the EU, experiencing an 11% drop in population as young people left to find opportunities elsewhere. While scandal after scandal dogged previous administrations – ‘Barcelonagate’, ‘The Eight Dwarves’, the golden bars, massive corruption facilitated by the absolute power of the Prosecutor General and the close collaboration with former Prime Minister Boyko Borissov – your party came out of the movement of the people to change all that. And that movement has made changes. But many issues remain, and I think it’s really important that it’s put on record here that all of those cases of those in power accused of robbing the Bulgarian people will be investigated, those responsible held to account and that there will be no impunity. Lastly, I agree with you totally: Bulgaria should be in Schengen, but I do have a concern that the European Commission is demanding a price for that – that you act as Europe’s brutal military border guards, in violation of human rights. There have been multiple accounts of pushbacks. We have a black book on pushbacks here, which I’m going to give you as a present, which I hope you read to investigate the evidence in it and ensure the upholding of human rights.
[EN] Andrey | Novakov said from the PPE that – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, Madam Commissioner, dear friends, I am making an effort to start with something positive, so I would like to thank Prime Minister Denkov for the efforts he is making and for the guaranteed and declared pro-European, pro-Atlantic orientation of Bulgaria – something that was mandatory and very important. Unfortunately, the positive things come to an end, because Bulgaria must return to the stability and predictability that it had years ago. By the way, it was also visible when Prime Minister Boyko Borissov was here in the hall. Unfortunately, Bulgaria was among the countries that were pillars in the European Union and the institutions saw stability and predictability, saw fewer balloons and kites. Today, this is not a fact. Unfortunately, we live under the threat of impending resignations, of scandals, which affects all of us and the image of Bulgaria. Investors used to come and stay, and today this is not the case. I may surprise you, but contrary to the reality in Bulgaria, in addition to the question of who, it is very important to ask how many. For example, how much money has been disbursed from European funds? I will answer you - two, 2%. How much money has been disbursed from the Recovery and Resilience Plan? Three, 3%. How many countries have indicators like Bulgaria? Zero. None. We can continue with the series of questions. How much will be the difference between the agreed money for 2024 and the money that will reach the municipalities? Most likely a large one. I think that our country should again take care of investments in the municipalities and regions. European money was visible and tangible in every municipality, and this is no longer the case. And this tragedy must stop, just as we must stop the transfer of funds from the old programming period for purposes other than those intended. This money was for roads, railways and bridges and for nothing else. That is why, on the basis of Art. 22 and Art. 29 I call on the European Commission to use special measures and guarantees that Bulgaria will not lose European funds from the Recovery and Resilience Plan, by attaching a timetable for their compliance. Failure to implement European instruments deprives people of reforms and investments Here we assess not declarations, but actions and achieved results.
[EN] Elena | Yoncheva said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, the government you lead justifies its existence by achieving several goals – Bulgaria’s membership in Schengen and the eurozone, as well as the need for stability in the complex geopolitical situation. Domestically, we have yet to see whether the request for judicial reform will be implemented. The proposed changes to the Constitution seem to aim more at undermining the Bulgarian Prime Minister than at strengthening the integrity of the judiciary. Five months later, can you say whether the goals of your administration will be achieved? Regarding Schengen, you chose the path of persuading Austria and the Netherlands, the two countries that continue to block our path to Schengen. Are you ready to put pressure on both countries with the Union’s mechanisms and will you accept a half-hearted solution for entry – lifting control only at air borders? And also, Mr. Prime Minister, on Sunday, Yemeni Houthis hijacked a ship with a 24-person crew in the Black Sea. Among them are Bulgarian citizens. Mr. Denkov, don't you think that Bulgaria should have a more active role in the dialogue with the Yemeni Houthis? And is it right to leave the negotiations to third parties, and to countries outside the European Union?
[EN] Dacian | Cioloş said from the Renew that – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, we are together, Romanians and Bulgarians, captive to Austrian Chancellor Nehammer on the Schengen issue and I know that you are making great diplomatic efforts to unblock both Austria's veto and last year's reservations by the Netherlands. I would have two questions for you. When I led the Romanian Government, I collaborated very closely on the issue of eliminating visas for Canada with the Bulgarian government at the time and the negotiating force was greater. So I ask you whether at this moment there is this type of offensive and joint coordination with the Romanian partners, with the government of Romania? The second question is whether in these negotiations you are prepared to accept certain elements that would unblock these discussions? With a clear decision: the Council's policy from December that both countries join Schengen during next year, at the latest, even if this were to happen in stages, during next year. So I would be interested if there are - obviously, you won't reveal the elements of negotiation here, but I think it's important that we can have a final decision on Schengen accession this year in the Council.
[EN] Ioan-Rareş | Bogdan said from the PPE that – Madam President, your Excellencies, Mr. Prime Minister, I have bad news for Chancellor Nehammer: Austria is no longer an empire. Gone are the days when Empress Maria Theresa imposed such high taxes on Romanian shepherds that she drove them out of their Transylvania, over the mountains, into Wallachia. Hungary has billions of euros suspended due to non-compliance with the rule of law, Poland, too. Not Austria, which is blocking Romania and Bulgaria's access to Schengen and violating the Treaty without any plausible reason. It is a mystery why the European Commission has not initiated proceedings against Austria, which has violated five articles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. By blocking Romania and Bulgaria, hundreds of billions of euros were caused damage not only to them, but to the entire European economy. While Mrs Von der Leyen is still promoting the Green Deal and demanding zero emissions, I respectfully announce something: every year, trucks waiting for 24 hours at the borders generate 46,000 tons of carbon dioxide. And yet, Austria got away with it when exactly the European Commission, the guardian of the treaties, should be demanding compensation. In the JHA Council in just over two weeks, Europe has a historic chance to eliminate the abuse committed against Romanian and Bulgarian citizens. In the event of a negative vote by Austria, I respectfully ask the Schengen member states to show their respect and support for Romania and Bulgaria and to stop discriminating against Romanians and Bulgarians on their own initiative, allowing them access to European countries through the Schengen entry gates or corridors. As a proof of good faith and for sure, the Romanians and Bulgarians could check Austrian trucks, small cars and trains for blood, so that illegal migrants do not sneak through the Austrian state.
[EN] Beatrice | Covassi said from the S-D that Madam President, Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen, what is Europe today? A shared project that must increasingly become a horizon of hope for its citizens. This means moving forward with the expansion of the Schengen area, as you rightly called for, guaranteeing freedom of movement and opportunities for all. Just as we need to make progress on joining the common currency to strengthen the economy and the internal market. But one thing must be clear: the European Union is not just a large trading and economic bloc. Europe is a community of destiny, built on the common values enshrined in the Treaties and whose most powerful weapons are cohesion, solidarity, and peace. This awareness must be reflected in our work between now and the European elections. Europe must speak with one voice on foreign policy—I am thinking of Ukraine and the commitment to peace in the Middle East, where a first truce has just been reached—to strengthen democracy, sustainable growth, and inclusion through reform of the Treaties, the Stability and Growth Pact, and the right to asylum, and to consolidate the Health Union. We are at a historic turning point, dear colleagues. And so it is time to rediscover the courage of politics today.
[EN] Iskra | Mihaylova said from the Renew that – Madam President, Madam Commissioner, Mr. Prime Minister, colleagues, Mr. Prime Minister, you raised the question of how to contribute to a united Europe, how Bulgaria can contribute. My answer is with ambitious and constructive participation of Bulgaria in the implementation of the policies of the European Union and here I will pay attention to the policies of energy security and independence, which are also part of the Green Deal of the European Union. What is your opinion, Mr. Prime Minister, on the potential of energy efficiency measures and renovation of the building stock to achieve the goals of the energy mix, reduction of the carbon footprint and decarbonization, especially from the perspective of Bulgaria – a country that is highly dependent on Russian energy supplies, has delayed the preparation and implementation of its plans for a just transition and the update of the national energy and climate plan. It has also inherited a building stock built according to outdated socialist standards.
[EN] Eva | Maydell said from the PPE that – Madam President, Madam Commissioner, Mr Prime Minister, welcome to the European Parliament! Bulgaria is a frontline state in the war that Russia has launched against Ukraine. Previous Bulgarian governments refused to provide military assistance to Ukraine and thereby created an impression throughout the EU of the ambiguity of the Bulgarian position on Russian aggression. In the new majority in the Bulgarian Parliament, this has already been overcome, I believe, to a large extent. But precisely because of these suspicions towards Bulgaria, it is important to clarify whether Bulgaria controls compliance with the conditions of the derogation for the import of Russian oil for Lukoil, which the previous regular government requested from the European Commission. On this occasion, firstly, Bulgaria has an obligation to notify the European Commission of the implementation of the embargo against Russia since 2014, and secondly, specifically under the decision on the derogation, we must notify the Member States and the European Commission of any export from Lukoil that goes through the exceptions related to environmental risks. Therefore, I would like to receive a very short and clear answer: has the Bulgarian government done this and have you notified the Member States and the European Commission?
[EN] Tsvetelina | Penkova said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, Madam Commissioner, Bulgaria and Romania have been part of the European Union for 17 years now. Those born in the year of our accession are almost adult citizens and yet, due to political interests, we are not full members of the most important integration unions, namely Schengen and the eurozone. It is unacceptable for an entire generation to be treated as second-hand Europeans. The European Parliament and the European Commission have categorically and repeatedly stated their support for Bulgaria and Romania joining Schengen. We have met all the criteria for over 12 years. Two questions for you, Mr. Prime Minister. How is our partnership with Romania developing and what are the possibilities for a common response? And what diplomatic steps has the current administration taken in recent months to convince the countries blocking us that Bulgarian citizens cannot be subjected to this long-term discrimination. As for the eurozone, we are again late. We started this journey with Croatia at the same time, but due to the political instability in our country, we have not made any progress for three years now.
[EN] Andreas | Schieder said from the S-D that – Madam President, Prime Minister, I am a convinced European Social Democrat and from Austria, and I have to say I think European solutions and cooperation is better than veto. So therefore I have to say clearly I do not understand the Austrian veto against the Schengen membership of Bulgaria and Romania. I think it is a big mistake European-wise, but also Austrian-wise. Secondly, Prime Minister, being a European I have also to say I work very much on the enlargement and I am very much involved in the Western Balkans and therefore I think also that North Macedonia needs the support of Bulgaria in order to enter the European Union. They have made huge reforms and they would be your best friend. So please also help North Macedonia to be quite soon a member of the European Union.
[EN] Matjaž | Nemec said from the S-D that – Madam President. Honourable Prime Minister, Honourable Assembly, welcome to the European Parliament. Honourable Prime Minister, the series of crises in recent years – from health, energy, financial and security – has had a profound impact on Europe and the entire world. It has once again been shown that resilience on the one hand and, of course, the credibility of the Union on the other hand, depend on the cooperation and solidarity of the Member States. The Union is resilient to the extent that we are united. Honourable Members, it is therefore unacceptable that Bulgaria and Romania are still not part of Schengen to this day, despite having fulfilled the conditions more than a decade ago. It is unacceptable, Honourable Prime Minister, that the political scheming of a handful is holding back the European idea of ​​many Europeans. We must also put an end to this in enlargement policy, which must be based on objective criteria and not on partial interests. The enlargement of the European Union is therefore the best strategic guarantee for peace in the long term, Honourable Assembly! Therefore, esteemed Prime Minister, we continue to expect from Bulgaria the pro-European stance that you advocate and rightly expect on the issue of Bulgaria's accession to Schengen.
[EN] Ivo | Hristov said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, recently in the Bulgarian political debate the concept of Europe has been replaced by Euro-Atlanticism. In the name of Euro-Atlanticism, Bulgaria has abandoned a long-term gas supply contract, while Europe continues to import Russian gas. In the name of Euro-Atlanticism and in violation of the Copenhagen criteria, Bulgaria has given way to Skopje’s ambitions to join the Union. Meanwhile, in North Macedonia, Bulgarians are still being persecuted without reaction from Brussels. In the name of Euro-Atlanticism, Bulgaria is also about to abandon the derogation for importing Russian oil. European companies were ignored in the competitions for rearming the army. In the name of Euro-Atlanticism, the fight against corruption was abandoned and the current ruling coalition was created. Meanwhile, the doors of Schengen remain closed to Bulgaria, the plan for recovery and development is stalling, and Bulgarians are increasingly refusing to vote. Mr. Prime Minister, I think it is urgent to clarify the concepts and goals of your government in the hope that in the European elections next year, Bulgarians will still find meaning in going to the polls.
[EN] Nikolay  | Denkov said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Bulgaria – Dear Madam President, dear chairmen of committees, dear members of the European Parliament, I will try to answer the main questions within five minutes, starting with the fact that the formation, the formation of the coalition that currently governs Bulgaria, was the only possible pro-European opportunity to form a government that could create stability in the country. And I would like to especially thank Mrs. Mariya Gabriel, who is here with me today, with whom we go to meetings together to convince all those who have doubts that we can, are ready and are working together for the European development of Bulgaria. From this point of view, it is truly disappointing for me that some of the Bulgarian MEPs did not support these efforts of the debate today, but tried again to create some division, which is absolutely unnecessary. Bulgaria is a pro-European country and our government will work for the European development of Bulgaria. Thank you for the comments that, along with conservative and liberal values, we can and should add social democratic and green party values, where we can find a common solution for the development of Europe in the directions that will bring prosperity, prosperity and peace to European citizens. No one has the right to claim that they alone can find a solution, so yes, we must join forces where we find common solutions and work together so that in the coming years we can ensure the development of Europe. Mr. Dzambazki asked me what the European Union can do for Bulgaria and why I have retreated from the thesis that we should expect such development. The answer is simple, because very often the interests are not opposite, the interests are mutual. What we can do together is the best that can also help the development of Bulgaria. And that is why it is important for Bulgaria to be fully integrated into European structures, into Schengen, into the eurozone, because when decisions are made for the development of Europe, they must correspond to the interests of Bulgaria and there is no contradiction in this. Regarding the issues related to Lukoil, Russian oil, I want to say absolutely categorically from this rostrum: Bulgaria has never during our government, and I have no information about it before, violated European regulations, violated laws, nor has the company Lukoil violated these regulations and laws regarding the processing and export of oil and oil products. So any speculation and any rumors in this spirit must be refuted and will be refuted with facts. I have checked them and there are no such violations. Regarding investors, I want to assure everyone that the progress that Bulgaria has made in recent months regarding the rule of law is already yielding results. In addition to the fact that the monitoring of Bulgaria's justice system was abolished, in addition to Bulgaria being ranked first in terms of the fastest development of progress in its justice system, the increase in foreign direct investors in Bulgaria this year is more than 50% - fifty percent more foreign direct investors in Bulgaria. So this is a clear sign that the efforts of the Bulgarian government are understood and supported. And finally, is there cooperation with Romania? Of course, each of the prime ministers, each of the presidents can use different means of expression, but Romania and I are convinced together that we must work to develop the entire region of the Balkan Peninsula. We have initiated trilateral meetings. We have started working on programs that aim to develop the entire infrastructure from Greece through Bulgaria to Romania, to Moldova, to Ukraine, and that is why we are working together. Of course, this is part of the pan-European effort to develop the Balkan region. And finally, I will finish with North Macedonia. Unlike many of you, I have a wonderful memory of our relations with North Macedonia in the 1990s, when everything seemed to be going very well. We were the first country in the world to recognize North Macedonia as an independent European state. Unfortunately, over the years, our relations have deteriorated, and I do not believe that Bulgaria is to blame for this. Therefore, I want to make it clear that at the present time, Bulgaria has no other requirements for North Macedonia than those set out in the European Union decision last year. There are no bilateral relations today between Bulgaria and North Macedonia, there are relations between North Macedonia and the European Union. They must be fulfilled by North Macedonia in order to be able to open the negotiation process. And in this regard, I do not accept any criticism of our country today. Thank you.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you very much, Prime Minister Denkov. Thank you for this very good debate. The debate is closed. (The sitting was suspended for a few moments)
