[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that The next item is ‘This is Europe – Debate with the Chancellor of Germany, Olaf Scholz’ ( 2023/2665(RSP) ). Herr Bundeskanzler , the floor is yours.
[EN] Olaf | Scholz said from the NULL that Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany. – Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to you here in this special place today, on Europe Day. I am honored and touched by your invitation. I am honored because, as freely elected Members of Parliament, you represent 450 million Europeans – and thus the citizens of Europe. And I am touched because 9 May provides the only correct, forward-looking response to the world war unleashed by Germany, to destructive nationalism and imperialist megalomania. 73 years ago today, French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman proposed creating a new, “organized and vibrant Europe.” It all began with the communitization of coal and steel – goods that for decades were used to manufacture weapons. Weapons that our grandfathers and great-grandfathers used to shoot at each other. The dream of the fathers and mothers of Europe was to end this mutual murder once and for all. This dream has come true for us. War between our peoples has become unimaginable - thanks to the European Union and to the happiness of all of us. But a look beyond our Union's immediate neighborhood shows in a terrible way: this dream is not reality in all European countries. At great sacrifice, the people of Ukraine defend their freedom and democracy, their sovereignty and their independence against a brutal Russian invading army every day. We support them in this. The founding fathers and mothers already assigned a task to the growing together Europe that goes far beyond pacifying its internal affairs. For them it was clear: Europe bears global responsibility because Europe's well-being is inseparable from the well-being of the rest of the world! The Schuman Declaration puts it this way: “This production” – meaning coal and steel – “will be made available to the entire world, without distinction or exception, in order to contribute to raising standards of living and promoting the works of peace. Europe will then be able to pursue, with increased resources, one of its most essential tasks: the development of the African continent.” At that time, this “development of the African continent” was primarily hindered by Europe’s colonial exploitation of our neighboring continent. For this reason alone, overcoming the consequences of colonialism must be a key feature of every European partnership with the countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, a partnership that leaves behind the Eurocentric perspective of recent decades, a partnership that not only claims but establishes equality. Establishing such partnerships seems to me more important than ever. 450 million – perhaps 500 million after the next enlargement – citizens live in the European Union. That accounts for just five percent of the world’s population. In Asia, Africa and South America, new economic, demographic and political heavyweights are emerging – a success, incidentally, of the division of labor between countries and continents that has lifted a billion people out of poverty. They will rightly not accept a bi- or tripolar world order. That is why I am firmly convinced that the world of the 21st century will be multipolar – it already has been. But what does that mean for us in Europe? “Will Europe become” – and I quote the French author Paul Valéry – “what it really is: a small promontory, a cape of the Asian mainland?” We cannot find the answer by looking back. Anyone who nostalgically clings to the dream of European world power, who indulges national fantasies of great power, is stuck in the past. And those who constantly warn of Europe’s decline will not win the future either, especially since they completely underestimate one thing: Europe’s ability to change and act. We have proven this time and again in the crises of recent years and the present. Just think of how we got through last winter together, in solidarity and united with partners around the world. The three lessons from this are as follows: Firstly: Europe’s future is in our hands. Secondly: the more united we make Europe, the easier it will be to secure a good future for ourselves. And thirdly: more openness and more cooperation are the order of the day for our time. In order to secure Europe a good place in the world of tomorrow, a place not above and below other countries and regions, but on an equal footing with others, at their side. For this to happen, the European Union must change. We need a geopolitical European Union, an enlarged and reformed European Union and, last but not least, a European Union that is open to the future. In all of this, I see the European Parliament as a driving force and an ally. Let’s take the creation of a geopolitical Europe. Here, in front of the European Parliament, Willy Brandt testified to its existential necessity 50 years ago. “The unification of Europe,” he wrote to us at the time, “is not just a question of the quality of our existence. It is a question of survival among the giants and in the fractured world of young and old nationalisms.” The European Parliament has always acted according to this maxim – and for that I am very grateful. You act accordingly when you uphold the strength of the law and when you repeatedly remind us all that Europe will only be heard when it speaks with one voice. Most recently, Russia’s brutal war of aggression against Ukraine showed us all how indispensable this insight is. And consequently, the European Union has rarely stood more united than after this infamous breach of the European and international peace order. A geopolitical Europe can be founded on this experience. How this can be achieved? During my visit to Charles University in Prague last summer, I put forward some suggestions. These include an even closer integration of our defense efforts and the development of an integrated European defense industry. The European Peace Facility, the joint procurement of ammunition for Ukraine, closer cooperation between many of our countries on air defense, our Strategic Compass, close cooperation between NATO and the European Union – all of these are correct approaches that we want to deepen and accelerate. We must set the course for Ukraine's reconstruction now. Yes, this requires political and financial capital – and for the very long term. And at the same time, this represents a great opportunity – not only for Ukraine, but for Europe as a whole, because a prosperous, democratic, European Ukraine is the clearest rejection of Putin's imperial, revisionist, and illegal policies on our continent. Europe must also prevail in global competition with other major powers. The United States remains Europe's most important ally. And in this regard, the following applies: The more we invest in our security and defense – in civil resilience, in technological sovereignty, in reliable supply chains, in our independence when it comes to critical raw materials – the more we will be better allies to our transatlantic friends. Our relationship with China is aptly described as “partner, competitor, systemic rival” – although rivalry and competition on China’s part have undoubtedly increased. The EU sees this, and the European Union is responding to it. I agree with Ursula von der Leyen: the motto is not decoupling, but clever de-risking! The countries of the Global South are new partners whose concerns and legitimate interests we take seriously. That is why it is so important that Europe shows solidarity and stands firm in its commitment to food security and poverty reduction, and that we keep the promises we have made on international climate and environmental protection. And that, too, is part of a geopolitical Europe: it is more than sensible that we now swiftly conclude new free trade agreements – with Mercosur, with Mexico, with India, Indonesia, Australia, Kenya, and, in the long term, with many other countries. (Applause) Fair agreements that promote the economic development of our partners, not hinder them! Fair means, for example, that the initial processing of raw materials takes place locally and not in China or elsewhere. If we embed this idea in our trade relations, we will also be making a major contribution to diversifying our supply chains. Europe must turn to the world. If we continue to negotiate new free trade agreements for years without achieving any results, others will dictate the rules in the future – with lower environmental and social standards. We already made a key decision about the shape of a geopolitical Europe last year. And the European Parliament was a driving force here too. We have opted for a larger Europe. We have said to the citizens of the Western Balkan states, Ukraine, Moldova and, in the long term, Georgia too: You belong to us. (Applause) We want you to become part of our European Union! And this is not about altruism. It is about our credibility and economic common sense. And it is about securing lasting peace in Europe after the turning point brought about by Russia’s war of aggression. A geopolitical Europe is also measured by whether it keeps the promises it makes to its immediate neighbors. An honest enlargement policy delivers on its promises – above all towards the states of the Western Balkans, to whom we promised accession an incredible 20 years ago. Of course, the normalization process that has begun between Serbia and Kosovo and the reforms in the accession countries must be continued. Of course, North Macedonia’s political courage must be followed by rapid progress towards accession. (Applause) But such progress must also be rewarded on our part, otherwise enlargement policy will lose its appeal and the European Union will lose influence and appeal. Honesty means that an enlarged European Union must be a reformed EU. Please note that enlargement should not be our only reason for reforms, but rather their goal. And I expressly welcome the fact that the European Parliament is working on proposals for institutional reforms, including those that do not stop at Parliament itself. I will continue to advocate for us to consider these ideas in the European Council. Some things are obvious: more Council decisions by qualified majority in foreign policy and taxation. (Applause) I will continue to persuade people to do this. And I am very grateful for the broad support from your ranks. I want to say to the skeptics: it is not unanimity, not 100 percent agreement on all decisions that creates the greatest possible democratic legitimacy. Quite the opposite! It is precisely the courting and struggle for majorities and alliances that distinguishes us as democrats, the search for compromises that also do justice to the interests of the minority. That is precisely our understanding of liberal democracy! It also seems essential to me for the future that we insist on respect for democratic principles and the rule of law within the EU. And here, too, I know that a very large majority of you are on my side. So why do we not use the upcoming discussion on reforms to the European Union to strengthen the European Commission’s ability to always initiate infringement proceedings whenever our fundamental values are violated: freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights? (Applause) Ladies and gentlemen, one more element must be added – I have just mentioned it: we Europeans must open ourselves to the future, without any ifs, ands or buts. That means, first and foremost, eliminating the old problems that have paralyzed us for years, problems that make it all too easy for other countries to divide us and play us off against one another. I am thinking, for example, of how we deal with refugee migration. Of course, the end result must be a solution that lives up to the claim of European solidarity. But we must not wait until this solidarity comes upon us like the Holy Spirit. Europe, as Robert Schuman put it 73 years ago today, is built upon ‘concrete facts’, upon ‘solidarity in action’. That is why I urgently advocate that the progress we have made in reforming the Common European Asylum System in the Council after long and difficult negotiations be finalised before the European elections. Your agreement last month on a negotiating position for key parts of the reform was a very important step in this direction. Now we must do everything in our power to complete this work. (Applause) We are united by the goal of better managing and regulating irregular migration without betraying our values. In doing so, we can make much greater use of one thing than before: in many parts of Europe, we now urgently need workers, including those from third countries. If we consistently link such regular migration opportunities with the demand that countries of origin and transit take back those who have no right to remain here, then everyone benefits. Measures for effective external border protection also belong here – as we agreed on in the European Council in February. Then acceptance for intelligent, managed, and controlled immigration in our countries will grow. And then we deprive those who make politics with fear and resentment of their basis. Opening ourselves to the future also means resolutely tackling what is probably the greatest task that lies before us. I am talking about the move of our countries, our economies and societies towards a climate-neutral future. The first industrial revolution began here in Europe. Shouldn’t it be our aim that Europe also plays a decisive role in shaping the next major transformation – for the benefit of all? I don’t need to explain to you what opportunity this change brings for Europe. What is important is that the citizens of our countries also feel this in their everyday lives, for example because electricity from renewable energies will be cheaper in the future, because there will be enough charging stations for electric cars and trucks across Europe, because new, promising jobs are being created in the energy sector or in the chip industry, because we are developing and marketing the technologies here in Europe that the whole world needs for the transition to climate neutrality. Shaping this change ambitiously and at the same time leaving no one behind – that is the great future project behind which we Europeans should now rally. (Applause) To quote Oscar Wilde: “The future belongs to those who see possibilities before they become obvious.” It does not belong to the nostalgics. And it certainly does not belong to the revisionists who dream of national glory or yearn for imperial power. (Applause) The Ukrainians are paying with their lives for this madness of their powerful neighbor. 2,200 kilometers northeast of here, in Moscow, Putin is deploying his soldiers, tanks, and missiles today. Let us not be intimidated by such displays of power! Let us remain steadfast in our support of Ukraine – for as long as necessary! After all, none of us wants to go back to the time when the law of the jungle prevailed in Europe, when smaller countries had to submit to larger ones, when freedom was a privilege of the few and not a fundamental right of all. Our European Union—united in its diversity—is the best assurance that this past will not return. And that is why the message of this May 9th is not what is being heard from Moscow today, but our message, and that is: The past will not triumph over the future. And the future—our future—is the European Union. (The Members of Parliament rise and applaud the speaker.)
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Vielen Dank, Chancellor Scholz, for that inspiring speech. I will now give the floor to the representatives of the political groups, starting with the President of the PPE Group, Manfred Weber. I would like to make an appeal for everyone to stick to their speaking time.
[EN] Manfred | Weber said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group. – Madam President, Commission representatives, dear Chancellor Scholz! Welcome to the heart of European democracy! Yesterday, 8 May: We commemorate and rejoice in the liberation from the Nazi regime. And today, 9 May: We rejoice – and remember – the courage of the fathers and mothers of European unification. Only one weekday; it is perhaps a quirk of history, a coincidence. But it is unbelievably incomprehensible that only five years lay between these two milestones in European history. France: De Gaulle reached out his hand against public opinion after all the German atrocities. What courage, what leadership! Konrad Adenauer took that hand for West Germany. He even rejected Stalin’s suggestion to accept a neutral, reunified Germany. He chose European unity. He chose NATO – against public opinion at the time. What courage, what leadership! Yes, today we are good at management: vaccine procurement, the ARF, ten sanctions packages, the energy crisis – all of that was managed. But De Gaulle, Adenauer, and also Kohl and Mitterrand were politicians who were not only able to manage day-to-day life; they had the power to shape history. Today, as in Prague, they are already talking about abolishing unanimity in foreign policy and about building a European defense system that would lead to a European army, to name just two examples. Emmanuel Macron spoke like this too. We set up the Conference on the Future of Europe specifically to discuss these issues. Unfortunately, after Macron’s re-election, there was no initiative, no convention. Mr. Chancellor, I must reiterate for ourselves: We do not need any more keynote speeches. What we need now is the courage to lead Europe into the future. Europe needs leadership! And we, as the European People’s Party, are now calling for a convention to revise the treaties in order to make Europe fit for the coming decades. You yourself have pointed out that this is the only way a large Europe is feasible. And as a second consideration, I would like to add today: Europe is very grateful for the clear pro-European stance of the Germans, of all the major democratic parties in Germany. But we also need guidance in everyday life in Germany. The debate about the phase-out of combustion engines has left many perplexed. Now the debate about the Stability and Growth Pact is coming up. I'm hearing little from Berlin about their position on this. We are facing fundamental questions in our dealings with China. I read today that the German Finance Minister was not allowed to travel to Beijing. They want to invite Chinese investors to the Port of Hamburg. Their coalition partners reject this. The double whammy, the €200 billion in response to the Ukraine crisis, was not voted on in the European Union, although the impact it has on the internal market is significant. And the arms deliveries to Ukraine: Some had the impression that people in Berlin didn't believe in Ukraine's military success. Only then did the discussion about tank deliveries arise, and only after months of long, agonizing debate are the tanks finally being delivered. Many of your government’s positions are often too late and not ambitious enough. Europe needs guidance from Berlin. As leader of the Christian Democrats, I would also like to point out that we are fighting climate change together. We passed the ETS, the social fund and the border adjustment text here together. Nevertheless, I say: that is not enough. The example of Viessmann. The sale of Viessmann is a warning sign. Our companies obviously do not believe in the Green Deal, in the business case behind it. Are we – and this is formulated as a question – creating more jobs in China than in Europe with our decisions? At the very least, that must concern us, and we must ensure that competitiveness is back on the agenda. Food production is also a major issue. Consumer prices are rising, and food prices are part of inflation. We should really be exporting more food to North Africa, which we are not doing, and at the same time our farmers are being made scapegoats. That, too, does not fit together; we need a policy approach based on cooperation. Last but not least, Mr Chancellor, when you joined the SPD, Willy Brandt made a promise. I quote: “Dare more democracy.” I would like to ask you: what does that mean for Europe now? What does it mean for us here in this Parliament for 2024? For me, as a representative of the EPP, an election includes a candidate and a program, content, ideas so that people can decide. This applies to the election of a mayor, a chancellor in Germany, but also to the election of a president, a president of the European Commission. Unfortunately, this Parliament’s proposals for the Spitzenkandidaten process and the transnational lists, which were decided here by majority, were not adopted by Macron, nor by Merkel – I say this explicitly – nor by Sánchez, and not by you. Therefore, in the spirit of Willy Brandt, please: fewer backroom deals in the Council, more democracy here in this plenary session of the European Parliament. Let us start with the future. Not tomorrow, but today.
[EN] Iratxe | García Pérez said from the S-D that On behalf of the S&D Group. – Madam President, welcome, dear Chancellor, dear Olaf Scholz. It is a pleasure to welcome you to the European Parliament on the day we commemorate our birth as a community project to guarantee peace and freedom on our continent. Chancellor, on May 23, the Social Democratic Party of Germany celebrates 160 years of history, 160 years of building a free, democratic, modern Europe and a permanent pursuit of greater equality among its citizens. Your presence in this House comes at a time when Putin's war against Ukraine is entering a crucial phase in the face of the Ukrainian army's announced spring offensive. We want peace in Ukraine. But we do not want the peace of the defeated. We want a just peace founded on respect for international law. And as long as the war lasts, we must continue to help the Ukrainian people in all areas: political, humanitarian, military, and economic. In this House, we are very clear about that. On the other hand, in a context in which high inflation continues to directly harm the population, especially the most vulnerable, we must move forward decisively in achieving the objectives of the social pillar with the transposition of the Minimum Wage Directive, the adoption of a directive on the minimum living income, and the right to housing as a basic necessity. Mr. Scholz, we are aware of the impact that the war has on German industry and households. Thanks to your leadership, Germany has made difficult but necessary decisions on matters crucial to the future of our Union, from military aid to Ukraine to the gas cap. And now we must lead the reform of the electricity market to guarantee reasonable prices. Ladies and gentlemen, if we want to advance the long-awaited strategic autonomy, we need to do so by talking about the reindustrialization of the European Union. Along with the approval of the Chips Law and the reform of the electricity market, we must accelerate the proposal on critical raw materials. And in order to address social, climate, and environmental challenges, as well as reindustrialization, we must strengthen economic governance, with clearer, more flexible fiscal rules that ensure budgetary stability with the necessary economic growth. Today, May 9, we celebrate Europe Day. And for the social democratic family, Europe is above all a community of values. A community of values challenged today by the far right, which has been joined by a conservative right that has lost and has decided to become the opposition. The conservatives, today, are the opposition in Europe. We have seen how they are also the opposition in Germany. And, truly, I think the important thing is to be aware that we must strengthen the alliances that have managed to build a European project based on these common values and not side with those who want to undermine the European project. We know which side Weber is on. He is much more comfortable with Ms. Meloni than with Chancellor Scholz. In any case, everyone will have to choose. Mr. Scholz, we Social Democrats are not pro-Europeans out of necessity; we are pro-Europeans out of conviction. Not even in the most difficult moments of recent European history has our commitment to the Union wavered. And I am convinced that this May 9th, Europe could receive no better gift than the German government's commitment to continue breaking down resistance and reaching agreements in times of crisis, advancing integration, breaking taboos, and working for progress in defense of our system of values, which is none other than defending democracy, freedom, and respect for human rights.
[EN] Stéphane | Séjourné said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew Group. – Madam President, Mr. Chancellor, dear colleagues, welcome as well. It is my turn to welcome you to the European Parliament. Especially since Germany's European commitment has always been present in recent decades. I must say that your coalition, Mr. Chancellor, has given new impetus to this commitment in recent months, and this was expected. In this respect, Renew is proud that some of our proposals, such as transnational lists, the end of unanimity – you mentioned the principles in foreign policy – which we so lack with regard to China, which is also supported by the FDP in Germany, are now official proposals of the German government. This new determination to think about the Europe of tomorrow is essential, and the speech in Prague was, Mr. Chancellor, welcome. We, European parliamentarians, are asking for this vision from the European capitals. That, yes, of a change of era. Managing the crisis is not enough. We must now anticipate them, prevent them. Prevent future ones, but also build and plan ahead. Let's take energy, Mr. Chancellor. We got through the winter, we made efforts, diversified our supplies, and accelerated renewables. Here in the European Parliament, we have worked in this direction. But the following winter is a real challenge, and we need more electricity at a time when our consumption is exploding. We therefore need to produce more electricity, and it must be carbon-free. What are your proposals at the European level to ensure our continent is at the forefront of tomorrow's energy? Germany also has a great responsibility for the stability of the electricity grid throughout the European Union, and for solidarity, as it is also the largest economy in the European Union. In digital technology, our continent has been able to impose its ethics, its model. I have confidence in us to be the first to define international standards for AI, as we have done for digital giants and e-commerce. But Europe must not just be there to curb technological disruptions. It must be the driving force. We must be the land of investment for artificial intelligence and quantum computing. However, we know that, in this area, much remains to be done to address the barriers to investment and training. The green transition, like the digital transition, are the two pillars of our European sovereignty. They will be successful through the action of Europe and its Member States, but also because we will provide a favorable, predictable, and sustainable framework for our businesses to invest in them. I will conclude, Mr. Chancellor, with something that concerns my group, Renew Europe, by reminding you of our commitment to the European Union's massive support for Ukraine, in financing, training, material assistance, and yes, also in weapons. And I would like to commend the efforts of the European Commission, and particularly Commissioner Breton, in this area in recent weeks. My group will continue every day to push each State to contribute more so that Ukraine can win this war. Germany has made decisive choices on this issue; in any case, you can perhaps detail for us the next steps in your commitment to assisting Ukraine. Our Europe must also be faithful to the Ukrainian sacrifices, in the sense that we must now plan the institutional framework in which we find ourselves to welcome other European countries. Those who today have chosen democracy, our values, our European DNA. So, Mr. Chancellor, you ended with a quote: I will also end with a quote, that of a great social democrat, this time French, Jacques Delors, who said that "Europe is like a bicycle; if it doesn't move forward, it falls." I hope that collectively, we will succeed in making it move forward.
[EN] Terry | Reintke said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group. – Madam President, Commission representatives, dear colleagues, Mr Chancellor, you have come to Strasbourg at a very good time because, to be honest, after the last few months there is a lot for the man from Berlin with the power to set directives to mend. As is well known, the traffic light coalition stood in with a promise of new beginnings, renewal and progress. During the election campaign, your party itself portrayed you as a climate chancellor, as someone who gets to grips with things, as someone who delivers. To be honest, this promise of new beginnings has impressed many here in Europe too: finally, a chancellor who wants to change something after years of stagnation, after years of the “German vote”, finally someone with an agenda. But I must be quite honest, Mr Chancellor, the image of you as a chancellor who delivers has unfortunately faded in recent months. And also the demands that some in this coalition have on Germany’s role in Europe, and, it seems – and I must say this openly – sometimes your own too. Because you let things go instead of taking a clear position. When the FDP, for example, jeopardizes Germany’s credibility and undermines the reputation of the German federal government as a reliable partner in Europe, and when it comes to a key climate policy project of the European Union, the end of the combustion engine, a centerpiece of the “Fit for 55” package, what does the German Chancellor do? First he says nothing, and then he backs the coalition partner who is currently squandering the trust of its European partners. Or another example: Mr. Chancellor, you rightly took the lead in marking a change in the course of events in Ukraine. But then in many places here in Brussels and Strasbourg and in many capitals of the European Union it often seems as if every concrete measure has to be wrested from you with great effort. In a situation where solidarity and the ability to act were required, this is not the way a German Chancellor should position himself. I could continue this list, but that is not why we are here. I am here, Mr. Chancellor, because I would like to appeal to you. I would like to appeal to you because I want to see you fight for Europe, because we need a German Chancellor who thinks European and takes a leading role. For example, I would like a Chancellor who has learned from his own party's mistakes towards Russia and does not adopt exactly the same tone towards China, … (Applause) … who prioritizes human rights in a wise, common European strategy towards China and also draws the necessary conclusions for the industrial and economic strength of the European Union. I would like a Chancellor who knows that this continent can only be competitive if it sticks together and if it finally moves forward with the green transformation and no longer lags behind. Even if that costs money, Mr. Chancellor. And yes, I know who your Finance Minister is. And yet: I want a Chancellor who convinces the Germans that the Stability and Growth Pact, in its current form, is holding back precisely these important investments in the future. I want a Chancellor who says – and you mentioned this yourself: I come from a city that became rich and powerful not because it closed itself off, but because it opened itself up to the world. That is why I clearly oppose an asylum policy that seeks to build a Fortress Europe. That is the kind of Chancellor I want. 73 years ago, Robert Schuman changed the history of this continent forever in a groundbreaking speech. At a time when the terror of Nazi Germany had brought death and misery and there were probably hardly any people in Europe who had not lost loved ones in recent years, he painted a picture of peace, togetherness and a better future. Today I want a Chancellor who leads the way with such foresight. Yes, Mr. Chancellor, you want the right thing: enlargement, the ability to act, and an end to unanimity in the European Council. You're advocating for a Convention, but don't remain vague; instead, move forward together with this Parliament! We have proposed launching a European Convention. I am certain that if you campaign for this with all your might in the Council, we can gain a majority and convene a European Convention before the European elections.
[EN] Ryszard Antoni | Legutko said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR Group . – Madam President, Mr Chancellor, ladies and gentlemen, to understand the role of Germany, one needs to start with the basic question: what sort of political system is the European Union? And I submit it is a combination of an oligarchy and a tyranny of the majority. The Parliament functions, of course, as the tyranny of the majority and the Commission is a typically oligarchic institution, unelected with limited democratic legitimacy and having an unquestionable lust for power. And as far as I could understand you, Mr Chancellor, you want this body to have even more power. But the pillars of European oligarchy are the big guys among the Member States, and the biggest is, of course, Germany. The big guys do what they want, never bothering to consult anyone and calling it leadership. And with the voting system in the Council securing their interests, there is little chance they could be outvoted. Of many sins that the German Governments have committed, let me mention two: the migration crisis – when Germany single-handedly opened the EU borders – and recently, the energy and security crisis, which resulted from its having a long and murky tradition of political romance with Russia. Today, the German politicians beat their breasts and promise to be good boys in the future. Well, the problem with the big guys is they can promise anything and repentance is easy for them as it is inconsequential. When I heard that the best option would be the gradual abolition of the veto and the abolition of the veto in foreign policy, I simply cannot believe my ears. The Russian policy was the most spectacular disaster of the EU’s big guys, and those who are most responsible for this want to have more power in foreign policy. The logic behind it boggles the mind. The more we screw up, the more power we want. The logic would be the reverse. Because you screw up so much, you should be kept in check for as long as possible. Chancellor Scholz, I do not have any illusions about Germany mending its ways. You are too big, you are too hubristic, especially lately, I read your statement and I heard something like this today also, about Germany taking responsibility for the EU. Just a matter of interest, if you could satisfy my intellectual curiosity, where can one read about the German responsibility for the EU in the Treaties? The only proper thing for the German Governments would be to take the backbenches. And as political hygiene requires, let others run the show. You tried. You failed. You should withdraw. Unless, Mr Chancellor, you and your colleagues in the European oligarchy believe that German leaders, like diamonds, are forever.
[EN] Gunnar | Beck said from the ID that on behalf of the ID group. – Madam President! Are the Germans crazy? half the world is asking itself. And the answer is: yes, because Germany suffers from the savior complex and belongs on the couch. For 15 years, Germany has wanted to save everything and everyone. You have apparently saved the euro, but at the expense of monetary stability and at the expense of savers and pensioners who finance your record inflation and debt. The Wall Street Journal called your global climate rescue the stupidest energy policy in the world, because with a 1.3% share of global CO2 emissions, Germany cannot save the climate; instead, you are ruining the German middle class and our citizens through unaffordable electricity and heating costs, and forced renovations. If you can’t afford that, US real estate funds will gratefully buy the house you have saved up for so long at far less than it’s worth. You also want to save migrants. Every single one of the additional five, six, seven million people from the Orient and Africa that we have had in our country for the last ten years costs us around 700,000 euros on average over a lifetime, or 17,500 euros annually. Africa is creating a new Germany of 85 million people every 18 months: do you want to save them too? And finally, your Russia policy: together with Merkel, you led Germany into energy dependence on Russia, although this at least offers cheap energy. Then Big Brother simply blew up the Nord Stream pipeline. You persistently refuse to provide any information and impose new sanctions on Russia almost every month, which harm us more than Russia. And you supply weapons with which the West can prolong the war but which Ukraine cannot win. The German government and the EU suffer from the helper syndrome, but they are helping no one; they are harming themselves. The psychoanalyst Alfred Adler saw the causes of the helper syndrome in the awareness of their own inferiority. The helper tries to cover up his own problems by turning to those who are worse off. He doesn't care whether his help is effective, because that would prevent him from relativizing his own inferiority. The patient, Germany, needs therapy to overcome his low self-esteem and free himself from the helper syndrome, because unfortunately, the bill for your pathological altruism isn't paid by your government, but by our citizens.
[EN] Martin | Schirdewan said from the The Left that on behalf of the Left group. – Madam President, Chancellor Scholz, people are longing for answers because of the ever-growing social injustice, and unfortunately you did not address this issue at all in your speech. Exploding food prices, rising rents, one in four children in the European Union grows up in poverty, and 54 million people do not know how to pay their energy bills. On the other hand, wealth is growing immeasurably. Every day during the pandemic, another person has become a billionaire at the expense of the work of others. The pharmaceutical industry, energy and food companies, and now the arms industry are making a killing. These are the crisis and war winners of our time, while the majority of the population is left empty-handed and abandoned by your politicians. You could have announced here and now the skimming off of the corporations' obscene excess profits in order to put a stop to the greed-inducing inflation of the super-rich once and for all and advance the fight against poverty in the European Union, or - unlike your Economics Minister Habeck - announced a climate protection policy that would not allow the rich to continue polluting the climate with their private jets and yachts, while people with less money have to fear that they can still turn up their heating. And, dear Terry, let me remind you: you are also part of the government in Germany. No one will let you get away with this spectacle of presenting yourselves as the opposition here. The arms manufacturer Rheinmetall made record profits in 2022 - record profits - and Ms. von der Leyen and the Commission can think of nothing better than to throw millions upon millions of euros of public money into the greedy maws of the arms industry with their new ammunition law. I am certain, Mr. Chancellor, that your predecessor in office, Willy Brandt, whom you also mentioned, would have decisively rejected this misguided path of rearmament and militarization of European foreign policy and would have campaigned for peace and disarmament, especially now. I expect this commitment to a strategically independent force for peace from Germany, and I expect it from you too, Mr. Chancellor. Your Finance Minister, Lindner, has already developed an almost pathological love affair with putting the brakes on investment. Even the Commission’s completely inadequate draft to reform European debt rules has been rejected by your government. But Europe really deserves better, Mr. Scholz, than a Germany that puts the brakes on because of national egoism. The recipe for common European development is not austerity, but solidarity. We need a solidarity pact for jobs, investment, and environmental protection. Your government is failing to accept and accommodate the refugees in Germany, whom you now—in keeping with the spirit of the right over there—want to make scapegoats for your domestic policy failures. Your Interior Minister Faeser advocates rapid deportations and fences along the EU's external borders, and this Commission—just imagine—this Commission even wants to enforce prison-like detention for children. Wow—the German government supports Mrs. von der Leyen's insane plan to abolish the right of asylum and with it a fundamental human right! That's a declaration of political bankruptcy, Mr. Scholz. But I tell you, Mr. Chancellor: Europe's future will not be built on the backs of the poor, the weakest, and the vulnerable. If you want Europe, you have to take it away from the corporations and the super-rich. We finally need a turning point for social justice.
[EN] Jörg | Meuthen said from the NI that – Madam President, Mr. Chancellor, dear colleagues! You, of all people, Mr. Scholz, Chancellor of a once respected, strong, and livable country, which is in complete decline under your government, are presenting yourself here today as a great visionary for Europe? With all due respect, Mr. Chancellor, there is something unintentionally comical, even ridiculous, about this. Under your leadership, which is no leadership at all, Germany is a country in economic decline and advancing deindustrialization, a nation driven by energy policy, ridiculed in amazement by its neighbors. A country with a decaying infrastructure, with massive violent crime, with a disastrous immigration policy. A country in the midst of an educational catastrophe. A country with significant problems in medical care, even for its children these days. Last but not least, a country experiencing ever-deepening social and societal divisions. So please do your duties at home first before you spread your visions here! Former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt is credited with saying: "Anyone who has visions should go see a doctor." In today's Germany, you wait months for an appointment to see a doctor. You certainly have a lot to do at home, Mr. Chancellor.
[EN] Daniel | Caspary said from the PPE that – Madam President! I am amazed and shocked, Mr. Chancellor, at the way leading representatives of the governing parties speak about you. The most recent highlight is Ms. Reintke's speech today, or her byline in yesterday's WELT. I quote: "Our neighbors are extremely disappointed. The Chancellor's European policy raises questions." I ask you, Ms. Reintke, which European policy? Last year, Mr. Chancellor, you blocked the delivery of battle tanks to Ukraine, and in your desperation, the German Greens tabled a motion here demanding that you finally deliver. Or you say in your government statement in February that effective control of Europe's external borders is needed, and almost all members of the "traffic light" parties vote against it here in April. Or in March, the SPD and Green Party members of parliament vote for the compulsory renovation of buildings, and just a few days later, your Federal Minister of Construction opposes it. It is unfortunately obvious to everyone in Europe, and it is again evident here today: In your federal government, in the "traffic light" parties, and even in yourself, self-absorption and chaos prevail instead of the ambition and interest in Europe that Europe so desperately needs. That's why many in Europe are saying today that under Chancellor Merkel, Europe didn't always deliver in Germany, but under Chancellor Scholz, Germany almost always fails to deliver in Europe. Mr. Chancellor, it is time for a European response, but unfortunately, your speech today was not that.
[EN] Jens | Geier said from the S-D that – Madam President, distinguished members of the Commission, dear colleagues, now a slightly different tone is coming in here. Welcome to the European Parliament on behalf of your SPD Members, dear Olaf, dear Chancellor! Yes, Mr Weber, that's what it sounds like when Germany has a Chancellor who has ideas about the European Union. I would like to remind you once again that, unfortunately, we never had the opportunity to consider Mrs Merkel's fundamental positions on European policy. And Mrs Merkel's personal silence, her embarrassing silence, regarding President Macron's Sorbonne speech showed the entire continent what the lovely German expression "droning silence" really means. But Chancellor Scholz has proposed talking about the future, and I am happy to do so. The remaining unanimity in the Council does indeed represent a significant, slowing factor. Many people think of foreign policy, but I want to point to taxes: How many problems could we solve if we could put together a European tax package for energy, with regard to energy costs for people and also for European industry in the transition to climate neutrality?
[EN] Nicola | Beer said from the Renew that – Madam President, Russia’s brutal war of aggression against Ukraine, China’s aggression against Taiwan, the effects of climate change – Mr Weber, we are living in geopolitically turbulent times. It is therefore high time Europe repositioned itself so that future generations can also live in security and freedom, peace and prosperity. European sovereignty and resilience must not remain empty shells. Let us fill them with life, with innovative ideas and consistent implementation. Independence from Russian oil, the chip law, the law on critical raw materials – these are steps in the right direction to strengthen the sovereignty and competitiveness of our continent. But the path to greater European sovereignty is not a sprint. Let us not stop halfway; let us show our stamina and ignite the European turbo. Europe needs more globalization, more trade agreements with democratic partners, not backward-looking protectionism. Thank you, Chancellor, for these clear words. Let us inspire the backbone of our prosperity, Europe’s small and medium-sized businesses. Through less bureaucracy, through more innovation and planning security, we can avoid ever new avalanches of subsidies, ever new regulations, ever more bans. Let us remain open to new technologies, Ms. Reintke, including with e-fuels; this is the only way to achieve a climate-neutral Europe. Let us promote research and development, for example fusion energy for affordable, CO2-free electricity in Europe. We need technological leadership again; we have to be first somewhere again. For all of this, for the strategic geopolitical realignment of the European Union, we need a strong and responsible Germany that courageously moves forward in the spirit of the common cause, just as it did in preserving the Stability Pact. You are right, Mr. Chancellor, let us use the major challenges as an opportunity; let us not duck away. Let us make Europe fit for the future through cooperation and enthusiasm, for the common cause in the service of the people. Because, Madam President, that is what we are committed to, not to political parties or ideologies.
[EN] Jordi | Solé said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, Mr Chancellor, today is Europe Day. Today, and indeed every day, we can congratulate ourselves on the successes of European unity. Many of these successes were pioneered by your country. However, we still have a lot to do to ensure that the EU grows together into a more coherent unit, for example with regard to democracy and fundamental rights. We must say loud and clear that the illiberal projects of some European governments are simply incompatible with the European project. We must be aware of what it means for the whole Union when member states lag behind in the press freedom rankings, when governments politicise the judiciary, or when legitimate democratic aspirations for self-determination are confronted with state power and judicial harassment. That, too, is Europe today, Mr Chancellor, and we urgently need the will and courage of countries like yours to reverse these anti-democratic and anti-European tendencies.
[EN] Lars Patrick | Berg said from the ECR that – (Beginning of speech with microphone off) … Events, the pandemic, economic uncertainty, rising living costs, unregulated migration, the war in Ukraine have prompted us to rethink the role of the European Union and Germany's role within that Union. It has been shown that in times of crisis, European citizens often turn to their national governments. I would therefore like to emphasize that, while it is imperative to maintain a stronger geopolitical focus, we must very carefully consider any further transfer of national powers to European institutions, and we should not be ashamed to protect the interests of the Federal Republic of Germany from a federalist ideal. I would like to urge you, Mr. Chancellor, to very carefully reconsider your support for qualified majority voting on foreign and security policy issues. These issues are far too important to be left to others. I sense a growing anti-German sentiment in this House, but also throughout Europe, and I believe that the realistic future for Germany is to be a strong member of a European Union that is a union of equal Member States, freely assembling for the common economic good.
[EN] Harald | Vilimsky said from the ID that – Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, roughly a year before the upcoming European elections, it is also a good time to take stock, because over the past four years pretty much everything that could possibly be done wrong has been done wrong. Starting with the coronavirus pandemic, when an insane lockdown policy triggered a wave of bankruptcies, unemployment, and psychological suffering across the continent, where the European Public Prosecutor’s Office is now busy procuring vaccines, and this is where the starting point for further problems was created, namely when the whole thing spilled over into the Ukraine crisis, where more than 10 waves of sanctions are now hitting one person: the Europeans themselves. Putin – the one who should have been sanctioned – is shifting his attention to India, shifting his attention to China. The Europeans, who said they would no longer take cheap Russian gas, are buying from the Americans, who are doing the business, and the Europeans are paying for it with inflation rates above double digits. This is the wrong policy from start to finish. I believe there is light at the end of the tunnel, that with the upcoming European elections the majority situation in this House can change accordingly and that we can have a future for Europe and not what you have done, namely guarantee permanent failure.
[EN] Mario | Furore said from the NI that Madam President, Mr. Chancellor Scholz, as the Five Star Movement, we have a very clear vision of the Europe of the future: greener, more supportive, and above all, free from war. Your country is doing its homework on these issues—think of the minimum wage and the trillion-euro plan for renewables—but Brussels has a very different attitude, preventing all other states from making the same progress as Germany. I'm thinking of the reform of the Stability Pact. Your government's position, expressed repeatedly by your Finance Minister, is a blast from the past, taking us back to the dark years of austerity, when GDP percentages were more important than people's lives. Without new resources, member states would never be able to meet the European objectives of the New Green Deal and the sustainable transition. Green investments, therefore, must be excluded from the new calculation of the pact. Finally, a reflection. Today we are all gathered here to discuss the future of Europe, but there can be no future without a present of peace. We need immediate European diplomatic action to end the war in Ukraine. Peace is built through dialogue, not weapons, which, moreover, should not be financed with European funds.
[EN] Siegfried | Mureşan said from the PPE that – Madam President, welcome to the European Parliament, Mr Chancellor, where a very broad majority of pro-European colleagues are working together on solutions for the citizens of Europe. In order to find the right solutions, however, we must make the right diagnoses. February 24, the day of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, changed a lot for us Europeans. This is not just about Ukraine, it is about our European way of life. What is under attack here are European values: freedom, democracy, the rule of law. That is why it is so important, firstly, that we stick together as the European Union, act together, and help Ukraine quickly and on a broad scale. If we had supported Ukraine more strongly before 2022, this attack could have been prevented. The attack was planned because we ourselves were not more active. That is why we need strong and swift support for Ukraine. Secondly, Russia has been preparing this attack for a long time. This attack was in no way provoked by Ukraine, as Russia claims. Therefore, please actively combat Russian propaganda. Thirdly, we must question our old theses. The thesis of not provoking Russia has proven irrelevant. Not offering Ukraine a NATO perspective would be wrong. We should not fear a weak Russian Federation, but a strong Russian Federation. Ukraine's victory is in Europe's fundamental interest. Ukraine's victory is the fastest path to peace in Europe. And finally, because we are a rules-based union, two more requests. First: 2% of gross national income for defense, as we have agreed in each NATO member state. And second: active support for the Schengen accession of the two countries that already meet all the conditions: Bulgaria and my home country, Romania. This is important for the citizens and important for Europe.
[EN] Pedro | Marques said from the S-D that – Madam President, dear Chancellor Scholz, welcome to the European Parliament on this Europe Day. Chancellor Scholz played a decisive role in important moments of advancement for the European project in the recent past. In particular, this Hamiltonian moment in the European response to the COVID crisis. I must say, however, that I am surprised to have to remind Mrs. Reintke and the German Greens, and not just the EPP, of this today. Dear Chancellor, in Prague, you stated that the path to the future is one of more Europe, a more sovereign Europe. You advocated enlargement, but also the deepening of Europe. As you rightly mentioned, the lessons of the COVID crisis remain – it was by investing together and with common rules and support that we overcame this major crisis. We will only now be truly autonomous in matters of security, energy, and digitalization if we are more Europe. Therefore, I believe we need to discuss, starting now, a permanent European investment capacity as the next step in deepening this Union, if we truly want to be more Europe.
[EN] Ulrike | Müller said from the Renew that – Madam President, Mr. Chancellor! Shaping Europe? Yes, but you will be judged by your actions in Germany. I can say: too little, too late. A little over a year ago, you began a turning point, and you correctly identified it. However, our Bundeswehr is still no more capable of defense; in fact, it is even less capable of defense. The same applies to energy supplies. While the self-destructive dependence on Russian gas is finally being reduced, the turbocharger for self-sufficiency with decentralized energy generation has still not been fired up. Instead, sustainably produced wood is being banned as an energy source. Our innovative medium-sized businesses and skilled trades have always been the backbone of our growth. Instead of effectively defending technological openness, your government here in Brussels is supporting the creation of ever new bureaucratic monsters, for example, three different supply chain laws. As a dairy farmer and representative of the agriculture and forestry industries, I must say that you have missed the turning point with regard to security of supply. Disruptions in supply chains show us how important reliable food production in Germany and Europe still is today. But instead of support in overcoming the challenges and recognition of their outstanding social importance, farmers and foresters are being subjected to ideology coupled with a denial of reality and mistrust in the form of ever-increasing bureaucracy, controls, and bans. Dear Chancellor, who will ensure high-quality food in the future if the farming structures are being destroyed by governments?
[EN] Anders | Vistisen said from the ID that – Madam President! Mr Chancellor Scholz. Your visit here to the European Parliament is a reminder of the harmful effect that German migration policy has had on Europe. Your coalition government with Merkel and the “wir schaffen das” policy that was pursued led to more than a million illegal migrants in Germany and many more across the European continent. Unfortunately, that policy continues under your leadership. A policy that destroys European unity, destroys European culture, and challenges the cooperation that is supposed to make Europe strong. A cooperation between independent and free nation states. Therefore, as a neighboring country of Germany, we must urgently ask that reason restrain itself in the Bundestag and that the naive, harmful and hopeless approach to migration that has characterized German and, unfortunately, also European politics for decades be stopped.
[EN] Tatjana | Ždanoka said from the NI that – Madam President, Commissioner, honourable Chancellor, I just wrote my own points, you mentioned when speaking about geopolitical Europe. It is integrated European defence. It is new free trade agreements, a larger Europe, institutional changes, management of migration flows, and on the last place, ‘United in diversity’, our slogan. I just want to stay on this and to ask you, how do you understand ‘diversity’? Whether diversity finishes within the borders of 27 Member States, as national states and 23 official languages? I think it is not the way Europe has to go. I want to cite Yehudi Menuhin who told ‘Either Europe will become Europe of cultures or Europe will not’. And cultures are much more than 27 and 23, and much more languages. And politics of linguistic genocide is taking place in many countries – especially in my country, Latvia – by abolishing education in minority languages, by not even giving the possibility to learn native languages. It is not the way Europe has to go.
[EN] Andrzej | Halicki said from the PPE that "Dear Madam President! Ladies and Gentlemen! Mr. Chancellor! Putin's brutal attack on Ukraine didn't come out of nowhere. It's not a coincidence, it's the result of weakness and bad European policy, including German policy. Therefore, we must draw consequences and conclusions from this, conclusions that will prevent Europe from weakening in the future. The list of grievances and accusations could be long. Poland's first point to you, Mr. Chancellor: if Ukraine needs weapons and money today, because only by defeating Russia can Ukraine guarantee our security, where are the Leopard tanks that the Polish army was supposed to receive for delivering tanks to Ukraine? Promises must be kept. But you have a bigger problem ahead of you, because I haven't heard a German politician in this room, from left to right, who hasn't made a long list of accusations against you today precisely because of your lack of decision-making. So, I have one very simple appeal to you, Mr. Chancellor: the future of Europe lies in our hands, you said it yourself. Tough decisions are needed. If you don't want to make them, please don't interfere."
[EN] Katarina | Barley said from the S-D that – Madam President! Welcome, Mr Chancellor! The world is in upheaval. You coined the phrase “a turning point” for it, and we as the European Union must also actively shape this. For us as Social Democrats, the following is crucial: this transition must be fair; we need a “just transition”. This applies internally: we must shape the transition in a socially just manner, for the people in all member states to whom we are obliged, and with responsibility for this planet. And we must recognise this now. Climate change is in full swing. But also externally. I am very grateful for the comments on the Western Balkans, on relations with Africa and South America. We must not repeat the mistakes of the past. We want relationships on equal terms. We want a “global just transition”, a global, just transition. And I thank you for my, for our home country, making a strong contribution to this.
[EN] Márton | Gyöngyösi said from the NI that – Madam President! Dear Chancellor! Your party decided to take a big step half a century ago by announcing Ostpolitik. As a Hungarian, I also remember well the results that Germany achieved in Central and Eastern Europe. But times have changed, and today the once successful policy has led to Germany completely surrendering itself to Putin's Russia. And in Central Europe, they have befriended politicians who attack European values ​​and even openly insult your people here, in this House, like Viktor Orbán and his minions. I do not think it was worth it. Just as it is time for change, for the Zeitenwende, with Russia, so it is here in Central Europe. I believe, Chancellor, that the interests of large German companies are important to you, but today's history teaches us that freedom, democracy and solidarity between the peoples of Europe are at least as important. Let us act together against Putin, but also against his European disciples! Let's work together to bring Central Europe closer together! This is what I ask of you.
[EN] François-Xavier | Bellamy said from the PPE that – Madam President, Mr. Chancellor, let's be frank: the differences between our countries often become worrying. Mine, France, has its responsibility. But behind the words, your coalition ends up putting Europe in danger. You talk about a united Europe, but after imposing austerity everywhere, you launch the "Doppel Wumms" without warning anyone: a massive support plan for the German economy, and too bad for the other European countries that will emerge permanently destabilized. You say that we must speak with one voice, but you go alone to China to maintain our positions there at the cost of our dependencies. You talk about solidarity, but when you close your last nuclear power plants in the middle of an energy crisis, the bills are mounting in all our countries. Your elected representatives here are doing everything to suffocate this sector, apparently in the name of ecology. But your ministers are expanding the coal mines in Germany and they are polluting the whole of Europe. You say that Europe must control migration flows, but you are doing everything to increase them in Germany. You said, Mr. Chancellor, that none of us wants to return to the time when the law of the strongest reigned in Europe. These cannot be just words. Hannah Arendt wrote: "Eine krise wird erst dann zu einem Unheil, wenn mit schon Geurteiltem, also mit Vorurteilen darauf geantwortet wird." Herr Bundeskanzler, es ist höchste Zeit, uns selbst in Frage zu stellen.
[EN] Gabriele | Bischoff said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr Chancellor, as the last speaker, one has the privilege of having a bit of an overview. What takes away from the speech today on Europe Day? I must say that if one puts aside the bluster and self-reflection, what remains is a clear and unequivocal commitment to enlargement and reform, not a ‘business as usual’ approach – and that is what we need. In Parliament we are really working flat out – you mentioned it, Mr Chancellor – on a proposal for treaty amendments. That will give us further momentum, and I hope it will give you in the Council too, to initiate a convention, because many people today mentioned Schuman: Europe will be built through concrete actions and through solidarity in action. We are delivering here in Parliament, we are relying on Franco-German initiatives, on broad support, and then we really will have a chance of taking action and not just talking about reforming Europe.
[EN] Olaf | Scholz said from the NULL that Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany. – Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I am very grateful for this debate and the many contributions. First of all, I would like to address Iratxe. Although technology was not on our side, my attempts to learn Spanish in Spain were sufficient for me to understand the well-delivered speech. Thank you very much for that. We face major challenges. We must renew the European Union, modernise it and move it forward. That is our common future. We need a geopolitical union – I have said so, and I have also spoken about the principles that must guide us in this process. I would therefore like to reiterate my very precise position on some of the points that have been raised here. Yes, if we opt for a larger Europe, if we are in favour of enlargement, then that must at the very latest be a reason for us to bring about the necessary reforms that will keep Europe capable of taking action. And that is the reason why – regardless of one’s position on the matter at any time – when one grapples with the question of how we arrive at a decision, enlargement can only be successful if we have qualified majorities in the European Union’s decision-making processes, at least on the key issues. And that can even be achieved without amending the Treaties if we reach consensus on the matter. This is not a nomination of minorities by some majorities, but rather the way in which we become capable of acting together through the constant search for compromises – which is necessary and which I consider a major characteristic of a successful democracy. Therefore, my statement is quite clear: I believe that especially when it comes to taxes, especially when it comes to foreign policy, we need majority decisions so that we can act. And of course we will have to discuss many other issues if we succeed in admitting more members, because this will naturally also bring changes for all the members already in the European Union today, because we will then have to extend solidarity to more countries. Everyone knows that too, but it is important that we start the discussion now so that it does not suddenly occur to us when the concrete steps towards enlargement are pending. And I want to say and underline explicitly: It is truly embarrassing that 20 years ago we gave the Western Balkan states the opportunity to become members of the European Union, and that we have not made any further progress today. The credibility of the European Union depends on our success in doing this. Therefore, all the political families represented here should help to ensure that, where we have reached concrete agreements that make the accession process possible for all six Western Balkan states, that we also influence our own party family on the ground, so that they agree, for example, to the necessary constitutional changes. That would be my wish for the European People’s Party with regard to North Macedonia. It would be our common European concern for this to happen. But we must work together to ensure that this happens, with the awareness that there can be no bilateralisation of accession processes – and this is also what we stand for. This can be made very clear to the citizens of the country. I want to work to ensure that we bring about this reform and that we do so in an orderly, joint process. I believe Europe will only succeed if North, South, West and East see themselves as a unit, if we accept our differences but join forces to form a common strength. I would like to repeat what I said in my speech: the world we will soon be living in, by the middle of this century, will have 10 billion inhabitants, and we will still only be around 450 to 500 million then. If we do not come together, if we do not act together, then we will be irrelevant and will not be able to have a say in the future of the world. We want to move away from the old dominance of Europe that existed in earlier centuries. But we want to be a good, fair partner in the world of the future, and for this we need our unity. It has been said, and rightly so – I want to say this about the dreadful Russian attack on Ukraine. And I want to make this very clear: This is a threat to peace and security in Europe and the entire world. Because the Russian attack – and this is a turning point – has actually canceled the understanding on security in Europe, the result of the détente policy of Willy Brandt, Helmut Schmidt, and many others, that borders will no longer be shifted by force. That is the understanding behind the CSCE, the OSCE, and all the political processes. That was also the understanding in the NATO-Russia Act. Russia has agreed several times that this is the right course of action. And the attack on Ukraine is the imperialist vision that if one is stronger, one could simply annex part of one’s neighboring country’s territory. We cannot and will not accept that. And that is why we will support Ukraine for as long as necessary, and that it can rely on us. I want to expressly say that I listened with interest to one or two contributions from across the political spectrum, happily delivered in German, but even so, that did not always help the matter. One thing is quite clear, and perhaps this needs to be said first so that people get the right perspective: Germany is Ukraine’s biggest supporter among the member states of the European Union. We will remain so, and we are so because we want to support Ukraine in its fight for freedom and independence. Germany is also at the forefront when it comes to supplying weapons. Some people here have forgotten that, perhaps because they are too far away, but that is exactly the reality. It will remain that way. And when we then decided, in close cooperation and close coordination with many others, for example when it comes to tanks, to also supply battle tanks, many of those who had previously been actively involved in the debate were no longer to be found. That is the actual reality. But it speaks precisely for what the majority of German citizens consider right: a cautious policy that is always coordinated with allies and friends, no unilateral action, but decisive, balanced, and responsible decision-making. That is what Ukraine needs, and that is exactly what Germany is doing. I want to speak about energy policy, which has been discussed here from various perspectives, and leave no doubt about Germany’s position on this issue, a position which the government I lead has unanimously and consistently. As has been pointed out from the right, we are responsible for just under 2% – some calculate slightly differently – of global emissions. And the question some are asking is: why, then, are we doing anything at all when it comes to climate protection? My answer is: Firstly, we make up less than 2% of the world’s population, including Germany. And secondly, it is our economic power, our engineers that we have in Germany and Europe, our companies and the technologies that we can develop that will help us stop man-made climate change. This must be made clear. The citizens of the countries in South America, Asia and Africa are entitled to a standard of living and prosperity like the one we have achieved in Europe. And if we do not want to deny them this, then it will only work for them and for us if there are technologies that are just as cheap as today's industrial processes based on fossil fuels and that make it possible to achieve this prosperity. And that is precisely what we are doing in Germany. We have firmly resolved to achieve a CO2-neutral economy by 2045. That means electrification and more electricity production, as has also been mentioned here, that means hydrogen instead of coal, gas and oil, from now until 2045 – less than 25 years. We must achieve this by investing now. And if Germany, a country which, thanks to its industrial power – and other countries are similar – produces and consumes 600 terawatt hours of electricity per year, can manage that, by the end of this decade we will have to produce a third more, and by the 2030s we will have to produce 1,000 terawatt hours – all from renewable sources: wind from offshore wind turbines, from onshore wind turbines, from solar energy, from biomass, and all the other possibilities. And of course, with 24-hour electricity delivery, which means that there must also be storage options, and that we need power plants that run on hydrogen to supply during lulls. All these decisions have to be made now. But let’s also work together on this! Because if we are honest – Parliament, the European Commission, the German government and many others – then the laws and regulations that we have built and tinkered with and painstakingly crafted over the past few decades are not even capable of approving all of these investments in a timely manner. Many people want to invest, the technology is there. Now we must have the courage to help ensure that this pace actually succeeds by changing the regulations. And for Germany alone, that means 5 to 6 wind turbines a day, that is 40 football fields of solar installations a day, that is many thousands of kilometers of power lines that need to be laid, and a great many offshore wind farms that all have to be approved piece by piece – far more than today. And that is why we must have the courage, as the Commission, as Parliament, as national government, to change laws so that we do not look at them all and say: what we have set out to do can’t succeed. But if we do that, we will see a major mobilization of innovative power, we will have economic growth like Europe hasn't seen in a long time, and that will be good for the environment, but also good for employment and prosperity in the future. I want to say something about the question of common economic policy, fiscal policy. I believe I have a good history of speaking about this, because the reconstruction fund, what we did during the coronavirus crisis, I tried to push forward and outline as Germany's Finance Minister. And it was very effective because it was the message against a crisis that reaches us everywhere in Germany and elsewhere from a threat such as the pandemic: Let's respond together with an action of solidarity! And the fact that we did that had an impact even before the first funds were released; it strengthened the financial stability of all member states so much that they could act and no one had to neglect anything that was important at that time. Therefore, everyone can rely on this: The German government will always make everything that requires solidarity possible in such a crisis possible again and again. But we also stand for stability in Europe, including fiscal stability. Therefore, it is crucial that we achieve something sensible together, as the German government has jointly formulated in two statements and in the coalition agreement. This is the conclusion we have drawn: we do not want to plunge any member state into austerity crises. But that does not mean that we believe that anything goes fiscally, that we needn't pay attention to stability, and that limiting debt is not important. An immeasurable and unlimited increase in debt is no answer to crises. That won't work in the long run, and therefore it is a matter of finding the right balance on these issues. In this sense, we will manage to formulate a common solution, even if there is still hard work ahead of us. But it is a contribution to solidarity that we must make. We also spoke again about détente, and I quoted Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt earlier. But, Mr. Schirdewan, I want to add this: when you move around in history, you also have to be precise. The basis of Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt's policy of détente was always a strong defense. At that time, due to the East-West conflict and the threat level at the time, we spent almost 4% of our economic output on defense. But if we now say that we in Germany, just like many others in Europe, want to spend 2% of our economic output so that we can achieve NATO goals, then that is something that fits exactly with the policy that follows in the tradition of Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt, and is also the right response to a threat. Because let us not forget – and I would like to say it again here. Let us not forget: the Russian attack is a threat because it shows that the strength of power is prepared to override the law. And we must not let that message go unheard. We cannot pretend that is not the case. The attack on Ukraine sends a clear message. That is why our commonality in NATO is to ensure that we make it clear to everyone: We are strong enough to resist and defend ourselves, as a peace alliance that does not engage in aggression against others, which is a foundation for us returning to the consensus in Europe that should also exist worldwide: no revisionism, no violent shifting of borders. That is the foundation of peace throughout the world. In that sense, I look forward to the partnership with the European Parliament, to our forward-looking approach, and to the courage to act quickly. Yes, there are sometimes situations in politics where a lot of negotiation is necessary, but results must still be achieved. And yes, in a pluralistic world, in liberal democracies, in alliances of states, it is always the case that we have to come together. The common stance we have does not arise from something like the Holy Spirit coming over us and then suddenly we all agree. This comes about through democratic debate, through being conscious and willing to come together with others in coalitions, among national communities, in parliaments, and here too. And I ask everyone to make this effort. The democratic debate, the debate, must lead to a result, and indeed a good result for our common European future. (Sustained applause)
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you very much, Chancellor Scholz, thank you dear colleagues. The debate is closed. Written statements (Rule 171)
[EN] Milan | Brglez said from the S-D that written . – I am pleased that the tenth anniversary debate on the state and future of Europe is taking place on Europe Day, with the Prime Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany, one of the founding members of the EU. It is right that we look at the state of the Union realistically, with the necessary degree of criticism and self-criticism. Even more important, it is to evaluate with pride the level of cooperation and integration of the European continent, which the founding fathers of the European Union could only dream of after the Second World War. We must remember these dreams and visions even in an era of constant complex crises, which are most measurably reflected in the economy. We must not give in, above all, to the dictates of the market and capital, which create the feeling that economic cooperation is the fundamental goal of our integration, when in reality the European Union is primarily a means to ensure prosperity, peace and unity. Peace and unity, which are sorely lacking in the wake of the war in Ukraine and internal divisions, and which we will have difficulty handing over to future generations without reasonable and courageous action. Therefore, I appeal to you, Mr. Prime Minister, that Germany further strengthen its efforts to achieve a ceasefire and end the war in Ukraine, and that we all work together to find solutions for the future peaceful and socially and environmentally sustainable development of Ukraine and all countries of the European Union.
[EN] Joachim Stanisław | Brudziński said from the ECR that In writing, the European Parliament's "This is Europe" discussion on the future of the European Union is important because we must strive for the future together, but necessarily with respect for this fundamental principle: Member States are equal! It's hard to believe that the German Chancellor, in this place and on this occasion, is explicitly stating that the unanimity rule must be abolished. The demand to abolish this rule in key areas of EU policy is understandably surprising and naturally met with opposition. Such words are even more surprising because they come from a politician whose country is largely responsible for many of the enormous problems currently facing the entire community: Germany pushed for the mass and uncritical opening of the community's borders, turned a deaf ear to protests against the joint investments in Nord Stream and Nord Stream II with Russia, and neglected the energy security not only of its own country but also of the entire community. We are all now feeling the consequences, paying several times more for gas and electricity. And despite her clearly inappropriate and short-sighted decisions – a reality confirmed by the outbreak of war last year – the German Chancellor is demanding even greater power, even the ability to force decisions without considering the opinions of those states that believe otherwise. There is no consent to this, and there will be no consent, and we will not support efforts to transform the European Union into a federation.
[EN] Robert | Hajšel said from the S-D that in writing. – One can certainly agree with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz that we need a European Union that is geopolitical, enlarged and reformed. But I personally do not consider a decision-making reform such as the elimination of the veto right to be a suitable path to this goal. States like Slovakia must also be sure that they have the right of veto in areas such as taxes or foreign and security policy. Otherwise, I welcome the fact that it was the head of the German government who spoke on Europe Day in the plenary session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France, which can be considered a good symbol.
[EN] Dan-Ştefan | Motreanu said from the PPE that in writing. – I share your vision of an enlarged and reformed European Union, and a first step in this direction can be taken quickly, by resolving in the Council the unjustified blockage regarding the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the Schengen Area. You underlined the spirit of European solidarity expressed by Robert Schuman 73 years ago, which is based on concrete facts and actions, but for Romanian citizens this spirit is extinguished every time they cross borders, although the European treaties guarantee them the right to free movement, while Romania has been fulfilling the criteria for accession to the Schengen Area for over 11 years. I therefore ask you, in your capacity as leader in the European Council, to exert the necessary pressure on the opposition minority with questionable arguments in order to immediately correct this discriminatory situation, which risks transforming Romanian citizens from the most pro-European, just a few years ago, into the most Eurosceptic in the near future.
