[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Dear colleagues, we have with us today the Prime Minister of Greece, Kyriakos Mitsotakis. καλώς ήρθατε. Prime Minister, thank you for accepting our invitation to address the Parliament and the people of Europe as part of our ‘This is Europe’ debates. Europe is after all a Greek word, and the birth of democracy in Ancient Greece gave an impetus to a creative spirit that produced the architecture, the art and the philosophy that have shaped western civilisation as we know it. No society before the Greeks dared to believe that order and freedom were compatible and with the return of war on our continent and power politics on the global stage, we are reminded of the importance of safeguarding democracy, hand-in-hand with our rules-based order, to preserve freedom over autocracy. In over 40 years of membership, Greece has given the European Union influence and stability in the South-east Mediterranean. And no doubt, Greece’s importance will continue to grow as a new geopolitical reality unfolds. Greece will become an energy hub. Connecting the Greek electricity grid with the Middle East and Africa will soon accommodate imports of lower-cost renewable energy into Europe, and this signals a new age for Greece. This summer will also see Greece exit the Eurogroup’s enhanced surveillance framework, which helped steer Greece’s economy out a crisis which began 12 years ago. It was not easy. This year marks the end of a cycle of restrictions and close monitoring. A new era of sustainable economic growth and prosperity is opening up for Greece and its people. So today, we salute Greece and every Greek citizen for this important milestone achieved. Thank you Prime Minister for being with us to mark this success. Dear Kyriakos, the floor is yours.
[EN] Kyriakos | Mitsotakis said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Greece. – Madam President, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, I would like to thank you very much for the honorable invitation to speak before the elected representatives of the 27 states of our Union, at a time that coincides with the end of a difficult chapter for Greece and Europe, but also with the beginning of our new, joint efforts in the face of the great challenges of the future that are already knocking on the door of our European family. Because now is the time to boldly design the European Union of the coming decades. On such days, in 2015, Greece found itself one step away from the precipice of exiting the euro. Its society, at that time, was being hit by successive waves of blind and divisive populism. In fact, today, on July 5, 2015, a referendum was being held, which almost delivered the fatal blow. And only in the face of the specter of disorderly bankruptcy did the then government back down. But the price was heavy: closed banks, capital controls and ultimately a new, third, unnecessary memorandum that led us into a new cycle of austerity. No European society has suffered more than the Greek one in the past decade. Fortunately for my homeland, the Greece of 2022 has nothing to do with the Greece of 2015. Seven years later, I am here, on this stage, to tell you that those images have faded for good. For three years now, my country has had a new government, leading our country into a new era: one that wants it to be a leader in growth, in reducing unemployment, in increasing investments; now released, as of August —in a month from now—, from the regime of enhanced supervision; now ready, within the next year —in 2023—, to regain investment grade; and with citizens now more united, more optimistic, despite the great difficulties we still face. I am, however, at this stage to express a great thank you to Europe that supported my country, when others were experimenting with its very European status. All of you who contributed to ensuring that the birthplace of democracy ultimately remains in the most democratic, transnational family. Greece is now returning this practical solidarity to Europe, placing its own national progress at the service of our common European goals. The gray parenthesis that preceded it was, yes, traumatic, but at the same time instructive. Who, truly, would have believed a few years ago that Greece, which for almost a decade was the laggard in growth in Europe, would today show the third highest growth in the eurozone? Who would have calculated a few years ago that it could get there by reducing taxes and contributions, but at the same time without jeopardizing fiscal stability? And who would have predicted a few years ago that the Greek public sector, which has been a symbol of bureaucracy, would today be much more digital, much more citizen-friendly? Greece, then, ladies and gentlemen, has turned a page, it has changed, as it is changed daily by the Greeks themselves who no longer believe in false slogans, but only in the truth of action, because they see the result of the bold measures implemented by a reformist government. At the same time, it has strengthened the quality of our democracy and freed our political system from the stain of the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn. Thus, I can now declare myself proud as a Greek, that my country has restructured the economy and united society, while at the same time taking back its place as an equal and active partner in the European family. Let me remind you that Athens took the lead in the common European response against COVID-19, in the vaccination campaign. The EU COVID Digital Certificate was a Greek proposal, which was subsequently adopted by the European institutions. It was also one of the first countries to highlight the need to establish a new common European fund for the recovery of our economies after COVID-19; one of the first countries to draw up a national plan within the framework of Next Generation EU. And not only that, because at the same time, Greece also emerged as the guardian of Europe, when in 2020 —in March specifically— its eastern borders were subjected to continuous attempts to invade by tens of thousands of illegal immigrants from Turkey. At that time, in fact, I remember, in a gesture of practical solidarity, the President of the European Parliament, our beloved David Sassoli, the President of the European Council and the President of the European Commission were immediately, within 48 hours, at our border in Evros. This is an issue that remains dramatically relevant, as the recent tragic events in Spain demonstrate, but also permanent, as reflected in the operations of slave traders that continue both at sea and on land with methods that are, unfortunately, increasingly modern. However, I am proud, as a European, because in the past years, with the Greek ordeal at the forefront, the institutions of Europe have mobilized and succeeded in finding new solutions to new problems. The European Financial Stability Fund has evolved into the European Stability Mechanism. The European Bank opened the door to purchasing government bonds. The European Semester was established. The single supervisory mechanism and the Single Resolution Board were decided upon, as well as the constant technical assistance of the Directorate-General for Structural Reform Support. In other words, Europe supported Greece by accompanying it on the path of great changes. A path marked by the conclusion that national challenges are often also community challenges. Therefore, local egos have no place in addressing them. On the other hand—and I will insist on this—there is no EU solidarity without the corresponding consistency of the state to which it is addressed. These, therefore, are the twin foundations of the new European edifice. Ladies and gentlemen, I spoke at the beginning about the great progress that our country has achieved in recent years. In 2021, we showed a very high growth rate, much higher than expected—it exceeded 8%; a continuous decline in unemployment; a very significant increase in foreign investment. Public debt as a percentage of GDP has been reduced and Greece has paid its last obligations to the International Monetary Fund, two years earlier than planned; it has also repaired its banking system, drastically reducing the non-performing loans of Greek banks. All of this is documented with indicators and numbers. Addressing, however, primarily elected political executives, allow me to highlight two elements that constitute an intangible public capital, which was acquired during this journey: first, the conditions under which the Greek state moved, and second, the radical cuts that were promoted in parallel in the field of society, so that its own progress is synchronized with that of the economy and the country. As for the environment in which my government has been called upon to act, a glance back at the calendar is enough: a hybrid migratory attack — this was succeeded by Turkey's national threats in the Aegean and the Eastern Mediterranean, which reached their peak in the summer of 2020 — natural disasters, devastating fires from the climate crisis, followed by the storm of the pandemic. On all these fronts, we have always tried to turn crises into opportunities. With the help of Europe, we have better organized the guarding of our eastern borders. Our diplomacy signed agreements to delimit maritime zones with Italy and Egypt, partnerships with Israel, strategic relations with the Arab world, while the armoring of our defense is now framed by strong conditions of mutual assistance with France and defense cooperation with the United States. And if there is, however, an example of a test being turned into a driving force, that was, in my opinion, the management of the pandemic. Not only because it led to doubling the intensive care units, equipping hospitals, and hiring thousands of new health workers, but because it was the springboard for us to work, to establish a new public national health system. In my country, the institution of a free personal doctor for all is already being launched and all primary and secondary care structures are being reorganized. The above also highlights the second observation that I present to you, namely, the social orientation of our action, despite the unfavorable global and national conditions. Because, indeed, it is not usual for a country that is emerging from a major, painful, traumatic ten-year economic adventure to accept successive challenges; at the same time, however, to always try to stay focused on its goal, which is obviously none other than the well-being of its society. During the pandemic, we allocated tens of billions to support businesses and employees. We made successive tax and contribution reductions that freed up investments and boosted disposable income. Above all, however, we implemented significant changes in the work environment. A policy that can be summarized in six words: fewer taxes, more jobs, better life. This year, the increase in the minimum wage cumulatively added another salary per year. We established the digital work card as a shield against any employer arbitrariness and the employee can now determine transparently the time of his employment and his leave. But the conditions in the workplace have also finally adapted to European standards. And there, no discrimination of any kind is any longer valid and special provisions for working parents apply everywhere. Obviously, even in the face of needs, any progress we have achieved cannot satisfy us. However, it shows the measure of the effort; much more so when all government policies contribute to securing many well-paid jobs, from facilitating investments to the complete restructuring of the education and training system, in a unified concept that, I repeat, wants the progress of the economy to go hand in hand with that of society. Dear and esteemed MEPs, I began by saying that nothing in Europe, but also in Greece, is the same after the second decade of the 21st century. However, nothing resembles the 20th century either, as unprecedented changes are taking place across the planet, triggered by the unprovoked Russian invasion of Ukraine. War has returned to our continent once again. Energy turmoil and inflationary price increases are besieging all European societies. For many countries in the world, the nightmare of food shortages is reawakening. All of this creates a scenario with instability as the only constant. However, it also raises for every organization, for every country, an identical question: which side of the shifting plates of interests will they side with. Because the so-called equal distances only lead to the chaotic void that is created between them. While the role of the cunning neutral, you know, has been condemned many times in history, by Europe, by the European Parliament, but also by Greece. This question has been answered from the very beginning: we are with peace and international law, which is why we stand against the invader who violated legality and existing borders. We are with democracy and Western civilization, which is why we reject authoritarian neo-despotism. Finally, we are with justice, which is why we do not equate the aggressor with the victim and always strengthen the defender. Because the battle of Ukraine is not just another event on the international stage; it is a turning point in the path of Europe, the significance of which becomes visible only if each state simulates it in its own national context. In other words, we owe it to Ukraine today to prevent any kind of fait accompli, which could be imitated tomorrow by new aspiring agitators. And this has a special weight for two member countries of the Union, Greece and Cyprus. I am referring, obviously, to the constant aggressive behavior of Turkey, which even claims to approach Europe. The clear decisions of the European Council are already being raised against it. Its outrageous claims are answered by reality and international law, while we oppose its own provocation with our own readiness. In the Eastern Mediterranean, at a time when we are facing the great challenge of the war in Ukraine, one thing is certain: we do not need new revisionisms and revivals of imperial fantasies. And one thing is also certain: Greece is not going to tolerate any questioning of its national sovereignty and territorial integrity. And I am sure that in this constant struggle we will have all of you as companions. My position, therefore, has been clear for a long time: we keep our doors closed to threats, we keep the windows open to peaceful contacts. Differences between states are resolved based on international law and not by intimidation. The current situation, however, does not only have geopolitical consequences, but also economic and social ones. The international energy turmoil brings increases in the prices of all products, which in turn cause logical, expected popular discontent in all our societies. Thus, the combustible material is created for populism to flare up again, proclaiming simplistic solutions to complex problems. And in the face of it, as you know, there are no magic solutions. Consequently, Europe is called upon today to overcome multiple challenges: to outline a common policy of de-dependence on Russian energy sources, promoting the green transition more quickly, but at the same time to manage the explosion of energy prices; to build its strategic autonomy more quickly as a strong pole on the global chessboard; and, of course, to deepen democracy in its functioning and within the member states, because inequalities and distances from the citizen, unfortunately, remain. And it is precisely in these that demagoguery invests with sounding — but deceptive and inexpensive — slogans. Our task, therefore, is to speak to the everyday European in simple language without embellishment, opposing the extreme with the necessary, mobilizing persuasion against fake news. This is the way to show that national governments, European institutions do not constitute a cold, impersonal bureaucracy, but a coherent system that ultimately concerns every European citizen. In all the above challenges, Greece today wants to be present. We are one of the first countries to propose a European energy plan. At the national level, as the President said, we constitute an integral source-gateway of liquefied natural gas, which covers not only the needs of Greece, the Balkans, and tomorrow Eastern Europe. We are promoting our electrical interconnection with Cyprus and Egypt, from Cyprus and with Israel, so that our entire continent will soon be supplied with clean and cheap electricity from the sun of Africa and the Middle East. On the front of European strategic autonomy, Athens is once again taking the lead by assuming a role as a bridge to the Western Balkans, but having also integrated its defense doctrine into the security framework, the common security of NATO's southeastern wing — something that also concerns, however, the migration issue with slave traffickers. In recent months alone, we have rescued 6,000 shipwrecked people in the Aegean, all of them coming from Turkey. Pressure, therefore, is constant and requires new plans to address it. Finally, as regards democracy, the course of our country is illustrated by specific events: we obtained a new Constitution with a huge majority; we elected the first woman to the highest state office of President of the Republic; our Parliament is functioning smoothly — we have voted 331 bills in the last three years, among which is the one that grants the right to vote to Greeks residing abroad so that they can vote from their permanent place of residence; and, of course, we have institutionalized regulations for rights that had no precedent in the Greek legal order. Ladies and gentlemen, my interest, however, does not only concern what has happened and is happening on the continent and in my homeland, but mainly what must happen for the Europe of our future. One that must spread both in territory but also deepen in cooperation; to acquire its own defense and energy policy, leading, as we have done so far, in the green transition. And, of course, the Europe of civilization with which it must continue to supply the entire world. I must say that despite the difficult circumstances, I read the data optimistically. The united Europe responded more effectively than other continents to the attack of COVID-19. Very large countries with strong economies, such as China, have not yet tamed it. The decision to create a common vaccine market was a major breakthrough for Europe, as was the great leap forward we are making in creating Next Generation EU, borrowing at a supranational level and channeling resources through grants and loans to all European countries to support our economies, to enable them to overcome the major coronavirus crisis. All of this seemed unlikely to happen three years ago. Europe is a rising power in technology, a global power in renewable energy sources. We have a concrete plan for climate change and I know how interesting and how difficult, Madam President, the discussion you will have tomorrow on taxonomy issues will be, while, despite the difficulties, the aura of democracy always circulates between our countries. We have the tradition, the will and the culture of our peoples as resources to move forward. The latter is not at all insignificant, if you consider that major liberal powers, such as the United States, are currently divided over the issue of abortion, an issue that has been resolved in Europe for decades. Progress, therefore, is in our hands. The 750 billion of the new fund, which we have created, are asked to serve their title and role, namely to finance the recovery but also the resilience of our states. Our guide must be the experience and conclusions from the four great tests that we have experienced in the last decade: the debt crisis, the refugee crisis, the pandemic and, now, the energy crisis. What have we learned from them: first, that in an interconnected world, no state can handle crises of such dimensions alone, no matter how large it is; and, second, as I told you, when Europe moved quickly with common mechanisms and decisions, it ultimately proved resilient. And we are called upon to make use of these two lessons now in the face of the great energy disruption. Because the individual policy of each country undermines the European strategy and competitiveness. Therefore, a united Europe also means a unified Europe in terms of energy. We must have the strength, we must have the courage to be able to intervene in the markets when they have essentially stopped functioning. We must break this link between natural energy prices and electricity prices - it is something that I have repeatedly requested in the European Council and, fortunately, I see that there is now a movement on the part of the Commission to examine the way in which we price electricity on our continent. And I say this as a liberal politician, but who has the ability to look into the future and publicly call for European intervention when the markets stop functioning for the benefit of citizens. The green, zero-emission economy will come. The question is how we will get there and how in the meantime we will implement the rapid green transition, without at the same time collapsing the budgets of our households and businesses. This is the great challenge that we will be called upon to manage in the coming months, certainly in view of the difficult winter that lies ahead. We know that we need to accelerate the penetration of renewable energy sources – no one disputes that. My country will add almost 2,000 megawatts of new capacity, solar and wind energy, this year alone. We know that we need more interconnections so that no Member State of the Union is an island cut off from the European networks. These are the great challenges that we will be called upon to face. And this is a unique agenda of resilience and growth for the entire European family. For me, there are six — and I will close with this thought in order to be able to answer your questions as well — the great challenges that we will need to face in the coming years: European defense and a common security policy, taking into account the challenges of migration; banking integration and deposit protection; an effective European energy plan; a permanently coordinated action based on the recovery and resilience mechanism; deepening democracy and tackling demagogy; and tackling the scourge of fake news, but also a new enlargement of the European Union to the Western Balkans, which we must not forget in this room, an enlargement that Greece, as a Balkan country, actively supports. We want Europe in the Balkans and we also want the Balkans in Europe. We all know, ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament, that these battles are ongoing. After all, the historian Ian Kershaw warned us about this five years ago, writing in his book, Europe in Turmoil: “Europe fought for freedom and won it, along with prosperity that the whole world envies. Its search for unity and for a clear sense of identity continues. But its only certainty is the uncertainty that characterizes modern life.” And with these words I close, adding that we have a duty: to protect the freedom and prosperity that we won, that previous generations won on our behalf, but also to conquer the European identity that we wanted. Our first duty, however, is to make stability a certainty. Because, in today's conditions, strong states are stable states. And in a changing world, a strong European Union is the stable, self-reliant Union that will unite its peoples and play a leading role in the world.
[EN] Manfred | Weber said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group . – Madam President, on 7 July 2019, almost exactly three years ago, the Prime Minister won the Greek elections in a landslide victory. The Greek people sent a strong message of support and trust to you, Prime Minister, and to Nea Demokratia to steer the future of Greece and turn a page on the failed policies of Alexis Tsipras and Syriza. When you came into office, Greece was in bad shape, I think that was obvious. After painful years of poor leadership by Tsipras, you put Greece back on track – and thank you for this remarkable and excellent work. Thanks to you and thanks to your government, Greece is back in Europe and that is good news. It is important for Europe to have Greece back. First of all, everybody, I think, should and must underline that Greece is in a way not a normal country because democracy was born in Greece. Our western civilization was born in Greece. Europe was born in Greece, not to mention the princess taken away by Zeus to beautiful Crete, the princess who gave her name to our old joint project, Europa. There is no Europe without Greece. Greece is back on economic issues. Last year, even in crisis times, the Greek economy grew by more than 8%. When it comes to growth, Greece is among Europe’s top five countries. You managed to reduce unemployment in Greece. In Greece, in the quarter from summer 2019 to February 2022, more than any other country, you did it and the people feel the success in their daily life. Thanks to your efforts and to the determination of the government, Greece is finally also on the way to exiting the surveillance programme. On another aspect, Greece is back and that is about the security issues. Since you took over, Greece seriously cares about security again. Greece, due to its geographic position, is key when it comes to European security. Europe is not to be criticised but to thank Greece for protecting and defending our common external borders. And I want to be very clear on this, and I see that each and every single event on the border between Turkey and Greece is in this European Parliament an issue, and it’s okay that we discuss the issues. But on the other hand we saw in Spain, on the Spanish-Moroccan border, an event where more than 20 people died. And I have to tell you that the Socialists and the Greens didn’t initiate a debate about the events in Spain, but they initiate always a debate when it is about Greece. So we should care about the migrants and not about party political issues when it is about migrants. I have to be clear on this, that the PPE is strongly on the side of our Greek authorities. Erdoğan is misusing migrants as a political weapon like Lukashenko did. For us that’s clear. Our border guards, who are doing everyday the job of protecting people and the border, we trust them, we are respecting their work every day in the interests of all of us. What we have to do is to strengthen Frontex and what we have to do is also to clarify the rules for pushbacks, and I want to thank Margaritis Schinas for his work in this clarification process. Greece is back also on geopolitical issues. Tsipras, I have to say, mainly cared about Maduro. You care about the European interests in the Mediterranean, and that is good. Not only in the last years do we witness an increasingly destabilising role played by Turkey, dangerously raising the tensions in the region. What Turkey is doing is unacceptable. It is not a problem between Greece and Turkey, but a problem between Europe and Turkey. Greece’s interests are European interests in this border conflict. And we all have to ask ourselves, and probably, Mr Prime Minister, you can reflect a little bit in your final statement, how do we best deal with Erdoğan’s Turkey, a Turkey that is becoming more and more provocative and aggressive? And Greece is back on foreign and defence issues. Putin and Erdoğan tell us one lesson – Europe must grow up when it comes to foreign and security policy. It is great news that Finland and Sweden have finally joined NATO. And as PPE, our parties in Finland and Sweden always fought for becoming NATO members. The Socialists finally also supported this approach. The PPE is fully supporting NATO, but we also think that Europe has to grow up. We must abolish the unanimous vote principle in the Council side when it comes to foreign affairs, and within NATO we have to build a true common European defence with concrete projects like a cyber-brigade or a European missile defence system. Europeans have to be capable of defending themselves if it is needed. And if you will allow me, I want to finalise with a more general consideration, because you delivered, Mr Prime Minister, a great speech in the US Congress and in the Senate a few weeks ago. It was a big honour for you to be there as one of the European leaders. And when we look to the US and we also look to our European democracies, we have to see that these democracies are under stress. We are facing populism and extremism, and probably most fundamental question is, can we agree still in our societies about what is true, what is the reality? Because we have fake news discussions – you mentioned this – we have propaganda from China, from Russia, which tried to change what is true, the reality which we are based on. And without the common understanding in our societies about what is true, what is the reality, you cannot build up a lively democratic discussion between Greens, Socialists, the PPE and so on and so forth, and people cannot decide. That’s why the idea to strengthen this common base is so important. The fight against propaganda, too often this is unanswered. We have to strengthen good and serious journalism, and we have to make clear that the tech giants have a responsibility. We will vote this week on the DMA and the DSA, which would give and will give an answer on these challenges. So thank you, dear Kyriakos, thanks to you Greece is back in Europe. The Greek people can be proud about these achievements.
[EN] Nikos | Androulakis said from the S-D that on behalf of the S&D Group. – Madam President, over the past decade, Europe has been confronted with successive crises that have exacerbated inequalities to an extreme degree. The inability to reach agreement, to synthesize and to provide comprehensive responses to these challenges has made the era of convergence seem like a distant past. As the opportunities for a better life diminish for millions of European citizens, as they increasingly feel outside the walls of a society of equal opportunities, the threats to liberal democracy will only grow. The stagnation imposed on the political unification project by the conservative forces of Europe has given room for those who reject the European vision to exploit it to their advantage. This is the duo responsible for us remaining, Prime Minister, a slow-moving ship, as you said a few weeks ago. Some speak in the name of Europe, without doing anything — and I am talking about the conservative forces — and others pelt it with Manichaean arguments at every opportunity. Elitism and populism are equally destructive for the European vision. However, the world is changing and we must rise to the occasion. We have a duty to do more and to do it now. To defend, through a progressive political plan, social justice, solidarity, human rights, environmental protection. We must make citizens feel safe again in the face of the geopolitical, climatic and economic challenges of our time. Positive steps, such as the Recovery and Resilience Fund, must acquire permanent characteristics, especially for the Greek people who experienced harsh economic policies. It should be used as a tool for social cohesion and strengthening the resilience of our society and economy. I want to make a parenthesis. It is good to remember the humiliating referendum of 2015, but let us be fair. And remember very well the humiliating era of 2009 when you led the country to a 15.6% external deficit and bankruptcy, as the European Parliament resolution attests, because these conservative party choices were what opened Pandora's box in Greece. We must, therefore, talk about young people and create new opportunities in order to reduce immigration, to strengthen the purchasing power of Greeks, which is the second lowest in Europe. According to Eurostat data, Greek citizens are burdened proportionally much more than other Europeans. There is no provision in the Recovery Fund for the construction of social housing for rent at a low price, as other European countries with similar problems did. In the health sector, the fact that Greeks are third in Europe in private spending is revealing of the real needs that exist and the National Health System and primary care must be further strengthened. To address the climate crisis, the Recovery Fund could be the main lever for the diffusion of renewable energy sources through home photovoltaics and energy communities. We have the strange originality, while throughout the European Union the goal is the total decarbonization of the economy, you limit yourself only to delignitization, as was seen in the recent climate law you passed, making the country vulnerable to extremely expensive and imported natural gas. The European Commission is allowing national plans to be revised to include investments now, such as upgrading the country's electricity grid through storage and all the necessary things we need to strengthen energy autonomy and a just transition. But I also want to address the need for geopolitical security. Putin's illegal and destructive invasion of Ukraine is a tragic event for the Ukrainian people and a very expensive lesson for European elites on how to deal with authoritarian revisionist leaders. Appeasement, as it has proven, does not bring results. Strong deterrence measures are needed. There is no other path to a strong and self-reliant Europe that will not be a follower of the foreign policy of the United States. That is why I call on you to take a stand. The Greek people, through ten years of continuous crises, have lost almost 25% of their GDP and are forced to pay billions to protect the sovereignty of our homeland in armament programs, while at the same time European states continue to arm those who threaten our sovereign rights. Here, therefore, a decision must be made for an arms embargo on Turkey and on anyone who does not respect international law. And I am very glad that Mr. Weber, in a recent interview, said that he supports it. Now you support it. However, when the amendment came from the socialists, you personally voted against it. It is also inconceivable that European heads of state would adopt Erdogan's narrative on terrorism, when in Turkey anyone who disagrees with his authoritarian practices, such as Kavala and Demirtaş, is automatically labeled a terrorist and an enemy of the nation. Dear colleagues, dealing with leaders who flagrantly violate international law is not the business of one or two countries, but of all of us. We have a duty to ensure that all citizens of the European Union feel equally safe wherever they live, from Sweden and Finland to Greece and Cyprus. We therefore need to move forward with the necessary institutional changes so that there can finally be a common foreign and security policy. At a critical moment in history, where nightmarish scenarios reveal our limits and the wrong choices of everyone's past, we must breathe new life into the European vision, making it once again charming and hopeful for all European peoples.
[EN] Malik | Azmani said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew Group . – Madam President, Prime Minister, honourable Members, we face a series of alarming challenges that deserve the attention of the solidarity of all of us. The unjust and uncalled for war of aggression raged by Russia in Ukraine is triggering new crises – an energy crisis, food shortages – and these two combined will lead to an economic and perhaps migration crisis. This continent needs to get ready for all of this, doing so while helping the Ukrainians fight their good fight. It’s quite simple: Mr Putin must fail. Therefore, we must stand by the Ukrainian people with determination, and sanctions alone are not enough to ensure Putin’s failure. Ukraine needs our heavy weapons and here all of us have a duty to back our words with actions. There is one man responsible for the food crisis – that’s Vladimir Putin. Food shortages risk many vulnerable adults and children. And they are also a risk of a migration crisis for Europe. And I’m quite certain that a new migration crisis would seem very attractive to Mr Putin, but we cannot let him succeed. We need to finalise a new European migration and asylum pact. We need a strict and fair system for the whole Union to work but we need the whole Union to take its responsibility, and we need to do it now. We have waited for too long and the next migration crisis might be on our doorstep already. The Council needs to move and this House needs to engage in pragmatic negotiating with them to reach a deal before the end of this year. I’m worried when I read some of the reports of violent deportations. Yes, we must uphold EU law and yes, we must protect EU borders, and yes, we must ensure Turkey abides by its obligations to us. But we say no to illegal pushbacks of any kind – in Spain, in Greece or anywhere else. Mr Prime Minister, I hope you can agree with us in Renew Europe that the Europe of today needs to be bold so we can address the cost of living crisis facing Europeans. Like the common solutions we found for the pandemic, innovative thinking is needed to address our energy challenges. We need to boost our economic credentials by signing the free trade deals that are frozen. The deal with New Zealand last week shows us the way. Protectionism is no antidote to inflation. By investing in the modernisation of our economies, by embracing competition, by improving our entrepreneurial and investment climate, we can continue to sail the ship of prosperity. Let us be bold and fight back against global economic headwinds. And then, finally, we see that in many countries, even within the European Union, the values and principles that breathe life into our democracies are under attack. And I will be frank, Prime Minister, as always. We are worried about the decline in press freedom and media pluralism in Greece. The warning lights are flashing. Greece now has the worst performance in the EU27 as far as media freedom is concerned. Mr Prime Minister, I hope you agree with me that media freedom is central to our European way of life. Renew Europe has added a distinguished Greek MEP, Mr Georgios Kyrtsos, to its ranks. He is sitting over there on the first row. Our family expects the voice of its representative to be heard, according to European media rules and standards. We do not want to see another EU government leader slandering the free press because, as you know, it was Socrates who said, ‘When the debate is over, slander becomes the tool of the loser’ and we are aware that some in your political family have set a bad example, but please, Prime Minister, don’t follow in their destructive footsteps. Stop it, Prime Minister, and stop silencing Mr Kyrtsos and stop it now. Hold the pride of the Greek tradition of public debate alive and you will continue to find Renew at your side, facing the crisis ahead together in unity.
[EN] Tineke | Strik said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group . – Madam President, I thank you and the Commissioners. Dear Prime Minister, welcome in our House and I also welcome the Minister of European Affairs. During the eurozone crisis, we have painfully witnessed in Greece how citizens suffer if the EU fails to act in unity and solidarity, and citizens should never any more pay the price of a functioning monetary and economic union. Greece should be able to count on the Union to fully reap the benefits of the green transition. But we also count on Greece to defend the fundaments of the Union: a Europe based on democracy, rule of law, media freedom and non-discrimination. A Europe that respects fundamental rights, including human dignity and the right to apply for asylum. And I wonder is this Europe as well, Prime Minister, if asylum seekers try to enter this Europe through your country, their rights are brutally trampled? They are pushed into the Turkish waters and land. Migrants are even forced to push back other migrants and the border guards – masked men putting lives at risk – enjoy impunity. But those who save lives are convicted. And therefore, I ask you, Mr Mitsotakis, is this Europe? You’re closing down the most humane camps and have forced asylum seekers to live in remote and closed hotspots. You lose thousands of asylum seekers from Syria and Afghanistan in a legal limbo, using the fiction that they could return to Turkey, which they can’t. And the lucky refugees that do get a status have to survive on the streets. Yet, those helping refugees are restricted and criminalised; those who speak up, including media, are silenced. But, Prime Minister, covering up evidence doesn’t help, because the reality is recorded and reported time and time again by all relevant bodies of the UN, Council of Europe, by ombudsmen, NGOs and investigative journalists. And European judges refuse to accept this reality as it violates EU asylum law. That, Mr Mitsotakis, is Europe. And let me be clear: other Member States have put Greece in an unfair position. They breached the principle of solidarity by refusing a common responsibility for asylum seekers. We could be allies in combating these selfish policies and to have geopolitical answers to geopolitical conflicts. But sealing off the borders, deterring and pushing back refugees is not the European answer. And, instead of trying to demonstrate a shield for Europe, I urge you to solve the many problems in your society. People are suffering from it: the 36.8% of young people unemployed; the high level of poverty; the increasing use of fossil fuel riding this global crisis, instead of investments in renewable energy. Use the EU funds to create innovative green and social jobs to transform your country into an inclusive, modern and sustainable state. Prime Minister, we count on Greece to honour the fundamental rights on which true European solidarity can be built, both for the Greek citizens and for the refugees. Because there is no Europe left to protect or to defend if its core values are undermined.
[EN] Gunnar | Beck said from the ID that on behalf of the ID Group . – Madam President, I wish to welcome Prime Minister Mitsotakis to the European Parliament. I would like to congratulate you, Mr Mitsotakis, more than once. First, on paying off your debt to the IMF two years ahead of schedule. However, the euro is quite another matter. It has not served Greece well. Greek inflation stands at 12%. Rents in Athens are up about 17% and petrol prices are approaching EUR 3 per litre. Almost 30% of Greeks are at risk of poverty or social exclusion. One million Greeks work in the tourist sector, but the rental costs of sunbeds in exclusive resorts in Mykonos now equal the monthly minimum wage in Greece. Price rises of up to 110% for Greek hotel rooms far exceed those in other holiday destinations. Lay—offs in the Greek tourist sector therefore seem inevitable. Second, I would like to thank you for your efforts in protecting Europe against the ongoing migrant invasion. Last week you decided to triple the length of the border fence with Turkey and you prevented smugglers from offloading over 1 000 illegal migrants on Greek islands. Third, I applaud your resolve in resisting aggressive posturing from Ankara. Greece’s territorial integrity should be sacrosanct to the EU, more self—evidently so than that of neighbouring non—EU countries. On the other hand, Prime Minister, I firmly disagree with you on the expansion of the European Empire. With the highest inflation rate since the 1970s, this is not the time to waste energy and money on making the Western Balkans ‘fit for 55’. Rather, we should focus on the Greek pension of EUR 384 per month and the 14 million Germans who live near or below the poverty line. Further, your government recently decided to follow Germany in ordering F—35 American fighter jets. Instead, you could have favoured European options to protect European, not American, workers and jobs. Finally, at a recent press conference on demographic change, you seemed to adopt the logic of replacement migration, commending the integration of populations from Asia and Africa as a viable alternative, or as a viable solution to low fertility rates, instead of favouring imaginative family policies, Hungarian style. The truth is that European governments have failed us for 40 years. Even Europe’s richest countries were never rich enough to allow most families to raise two or three children in modest comfort. They are now importing millions of migrants which will rarely work and usually live on welfare. Sadly, our EU leaders are destroying our welfare state through the back door – and European culture and civilisation with it. Prime Minister, I implore you to resist von der Leyen’s ‘great replacement’. Greece was under Ottoman rule for centuries. You have no reason to adopt Germany’s guilt complex.
[EN] Emmanouil | Fragkos said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR Group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, thank you very much for your presence. For my part, as a young Greek who is given the floor, I would like to refer to the specific problem of brain drain, a phenomenon of young scientists fleeing abroad to find work and a better future, with of course very negative results for our country. Having recently completed my studies at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, I have found that fleeing abroad is an attractive option for 8 out of 10 of my colleagues. For example, during the eight-year period from 2008 to 2016, it is estimated that approximately half a million young Greek students and graduates left at a cost of approximately 15 billion euros, as reported by the National Higher Education Authority. But what is the reason? First, unemployment. Based on the monthly Eurostat survey, Greece is first in youth unemployment with a rate that exceeds 30%. We are in the last positions of OECD countries in the employment of young graduates aged 25-34, fourteen percentage points below the average. Secondly, low wages make it difficult to make a living. Unfortunately, young Greeks are often forced to do something completely different from what they studied in order to remain in our country. Of course, education is not free. The cost to the Greek state is estimated at 33,000 euros per graduate, but in the end they are utilized by another country. We can understand that Greece is only coming out of this situation at a loss. Our young people are therefore forced to leave Greece to find a well-paid job based on what they know and what they studied. Universities, therefore, have not been sufficiently interconnected in Greece and in the European Union with the labor market. There is no what we call an ecosystem that leads young people to try and innovate and, above all, to use their knowledge. As we know, however, work can make our young people truly independent so that they want to remain in Greece —not to be customers, but citizens— and, of course, to be able to create a family, so that we can face the enormous demographic problem. So, in addition to not utilizing our outstanding scientists, we must also examine a resulting problem. This is none other than demographic. I remind you that, now, for every two adult Greeks, there are approximately 1.2 children, while we need more than 2 to maintain ourselves as a nation. However, our nation is fading and the Greek family is disappearing. Our young people, brilliant minds, excellent scientists and indispensable to our country, must come back. We often see young Greeks in the news innovating, undertaking and excelling in foreign countries, but we wonder why this does not happen in Greece. In your election speeches, you referred at length to addressing the brain drain. Post-election, you identified the root of the problem in universities, and in reality very little was done. So, I want to ask you two basic questions on this specific issue: first, can Greece bring back all those Greeks who left during the last decade of the crisis and, second, how do you plan to reverse this specific phenomenon.
[EN] Dimitrios | Papadimoulis said from the The Left that on behalf of The Left group. – Madam President, Mr Mitsotakis, welcome to the European Parliament, but I want to tell you from the outset that the failure of your government is impossible to hide with attacks and slander from the first seconds of your speech against the previous Greek government. Mr Weber and Mr Mitsotakis — because you, Mr Weber, also started with attacks and personal slander against the previous Greek Prime Minister, Alexis Tsipras —, I want to tell you that such obsessions show that you may still see Tsipras in your dreams! In a democracy, the citizens decide. Yesterday Tsipras was Prime Minister, today it is Mitsotakis, tomorrow, if the Greek people want it, it may be Tsipras again. We must respect the truth; and the truth is that the New Democracy party bears enormous responsibility for the country's bankruptcy, because it left it in 2009 with a deficit of 15.4% and a huge public debt and a client state and corruption and oligarchs and cronies. It put it in the memorandums, and the Samaras-Venizelos government —in which Mr. Mitsotakis was a leading minister—, shook the bank in the air: 27% unemployment, enormous social inequalities, enormous regression. And, instead of the convergence that was the expectation of the Greeks when we entered the European Union, 40 years ago, based on what Konstantinos Karamanlis and Andreas Papandreou promised, we have divergence. And you should have told us about these, Mr. Mitsotakis. Greece has the highest inflation in all of Europe: 12% —40% above the Eurozone average—, the second most expensive gasoline price in the European Union. According to Eurostat, in terms of citizens’ purchasing power it is 26th out of 27. And you have a large share of responsibility for this, because in addition to imported inflation we have a party of profiteering and speculation. Greece remains first in public debt and has plummeted, during the years of your government: 27th out of 27 in press freedom and in the World Press Freedom Index 43 places, in 3 years, to position 108. Do you insist, Mr. Mitsotakis, that Reporters Without Borders is an unreliable non-governmental organization? Because I want to give you some news: we, in the European Parliament, consider it very reliable, it is our institutional partner, as it is of the Commission and the Council of Europe and the UN, and in a few hours, together with Mrs. Metsola, the President of the European Parliament, we will meet with Reporters Without Borders, which you slander, to strengthen our cooperation. So tell us, why does Greece remain first out of 27 in youth unemployment and 27th out of 27 in gender equality? Why in the three years of your government do we have the highest number of deaths from the pandemic per million inhabitants in all of Western Europe? And one more thing: what Mr. Azmani told you on behalf of the Renew Europe Group and Ms. Strik on behalf of the Green Group, about the need to control illegal refoulements, is also said by the European Parliament with the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, and by Commissioner Johansson, and they must be controlled because these things are not good for our country - as is the retreat of the rule of law. And since I learn that Ms. Vestager has asked you for modernization and reforms for the faster delivery of justice in Greece —as the slow delivery of justice is also an obstacle to investments and the utilization of the Recovery Fund funds—, I would like, Mr. Mitsotakis, to say something else from you in your second statement: in January in Parliament, you characterized leading Greek journalists and researchers as “underworld” and “gang”. The Supreme Hellenic Judicial Council —judges selected by the leadership of the judiciary, which you appointed— unanimously and solemnly acquitted these journalists of all charges. Do you intend to apologize for the heavy descriptions of “underworld” and “gang”? And one last thing about the recovery fund: Portugal will use the money from the Recovery Fund to build tens of thousands of beds and apartments for young couples, students and college students. How will you build them with the money from the Recovery Fund?
[EN] Kostas | Papadakis said from the NI that – Madam President, the future that the European Union is preparing for the people is already being experienced with unemployment, energy poverty, soaring precision, inflation and green taxes that finance green and digital businesses. This black future has the signature of the European Union and all governments in Greece, as well as the current one, New Democracy, which promoted the criminal strategy of green transition, de-lignitization and the energy stock market. Now, you are shedding crocodile tears for precision that will gallop even further, as the consequences of the sanctions against Russia, which the people pay for, expand, as imports of extremely expensive American liquefied natural gas increase, which is harmful to the environment, but beneficial to the profits of Greek shipowners. This anti-popular plan also presupposes the destruction of labor relations, the abolition of collective agreements with a collapsed public health system, exposed to the pandemic. At the same time, the New Democracy government is asking the people to come to terms with living in misery with the meager benefits that in no way cover the enormous losses in people's income from the surge in accuracy. The Greek Prime Minister tried to overcome these critical problems in his speech, presenting a virtual reality. The talk of exiting enhanced supervision has no basis because the supervisory mechanisms of the European Semester, the bloody surpluses and the Recovery Fund's super-memorandum with harsh anti-labor measures and group bonuses live and reign. At the same time, the risk of escalating the imperialist conflict in Ukraine is growing, signaled by the fiery decisions against the peoples that the Greek government co-signed and welcomed at the NATO summit. Greece's involvement is deepening with military bases, the dispatch of troops and weapons, billions of euros for NATO needs, repression against refugees and pushbacks. It has proven to be a myth that the European Union, the United States, NATO protect against Turkish aggression, which challenges the sovereignty of Greek islands and paves the way for painful co-exploitation in the Aegean. The Greek people have experienced the alternation of anti-popular governance from New Democracy/PASOK to SYRIZA, from SYRIZA to New Democracy, and always come out at a loss. Only the people can save the people. The solution lies in the escalation of the workers' popular struggles for immediate measures, the abolition of VAT, the special tax on fuel, the readjustment clause, with collective agreements, increases in wages and pensions, against the barbaric exploitative system, the imperialist wars and the involvement with disengagement from NATO and the European Union, with power in the hands of the many, the producers of wealth.
[EN] Kyriakos | Mitsotakis said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Greece . – Madam President, let me quickly address some of the points raised by your colleagues. First of all, thank you, Mr Weber, for making the observation – which I think is fair – that Greece is indeed ‘back’, because the country today objectively bears no resemblance to the country that we took over when the Greek people placed their confidence in us in July 2019. I think the progress that we have made is rather objective in terms of the performance of our economy and in terms of the intensity of the reforms that we have implemented. I would like to very much take note of what you said regarding the importance of structuring our democratic debate, be that at the European Parliament or within our national governments, based on true facts rather than rumours or fake news, because it is impossible to have a proper debate if we continue to question the basic facts. Let me take note of a point raised by Mr Papadimoulis, when he falsely claimed that Greece has been the leader in the European Union in terms of COVID deaths per million people. This is a lie, Mr Papadimoulis. It is plain false, and it is unacceptable that you show up in this House and replicate this type of misinformation. So let us at least get our facts straight when it comes to the issues pertaining to the public debate. I think it is very important to make sure that we can have a public discourse based on facts that are mutually acceptable. Let me switch to Greek to quickly respond to Mr Androulakis. I will switch back to English for the rest of my answers. Κύριε Ανδρουλάκη, άκουσα με προσοχή τις παρατηρήσεις σας σχετικά με το Ταμείο Ανάκαμψης. Μπορώ να σας διαβεβαιώσω, όπως έχετε ήδη διαπιστώσει, ότι οι προτάσεις μας στο Ταμείο Ανάκαμψης, οι οποίες έχουν εγκριθεί από την Ευρωπαϊκή Επιτροπή, έχουν ένα πολύ έντονο κοινωνικό πρόσημο. Ενδεικτικά, να αναφέρω τα σημαντικά κονδύλια τα οποία κατευθύνουμε σε δράσεις, όπως η κατάρτιση των ανέργων, η στήριξη των μικρομεσαίων επιχειρήσεων προκειμένου να μπορέσουν να βελτιώσουν τις ψηφιακές τους δεξιότητες, ή προγράμματα οριζόντιας εξοικονόμησης ενέργειας, όπως το πρόγραμμα «Εξοικονομώ», από το οποίο ωφελούνται όλα τα ελληνικά νοικοκυριά, αλλά κυρίως νοικοκυριά τα οποία είναι μη προνομιούχα, καθώς αυτά έχουν προνομιακή πρόσβαση σε αυτό το πρόγραμμα. Ως προς το ζήτημα το οποίο θέσατε σχετικά με το εμπάργκο όπλων όσον αφορά την Τουρκία, θα πω μόνο το εξής: προφανώς, κάθε ευρωπαϊκή χώρα είναι ελεύθερη να κινείται στον τομέα των εξαγωγών όπλων όπως αυτή νομίζει, πλην, όμως, θα πρέπει να λάβουν πολύ σοβαρά υπόψη τους όλες οι ευρωπαϊκές χώρες την πραγματικότητα η οποία υπάρχει αυτή τη στιγμή στη νοτιοανατολική Μεσόγειο. Η αλήθεια είναι ότι σήμερα μια χώρα η οποία φιλοδοξεί να γίνει μέλος της Ευρωπαϊκής Ένωσης, η Τουρκία, ανοιχτά αμφισβητεί την κυριαρχία μιας άλλης χώρας, η οποία τυχαίνει να είναι μέλος της ευρωπαϊκής οικογένειας. Αυτό είναι κάτι το οποίο οι ευρωπαϊκές χώρες πρέπει να το λάβουν σοβαρά υπόψη τους στις αποφάσεις τις οποίες λαμβάνουν σχετικά με τις επιλογές τους για τις πωλήσεις οπλικών συστημάτων σε τρίτες χώρες. Let me switch back to English to respond to some of the points made by Mr Azmani. I took note, Mr Azmani, of your observations regarding press freedom in Greece. I can assure you Greece is a country where everyone can write and publish anything about anyone without any censorship or any control by the government. Just take a look – and I have printed them here – these are just two indicative front pages from today’s newspapers which accuse me of being a liar, a sycophant. These are daily front pages from at least four daily newspapers in Greece. The same media freedom applies to TV, to radio and, of course, the Internet, where everyone is free to write anything about anyone. I would urge you to take some of these rankings which are published by non—governmental organisations with a grain of salt. Does one really believe in this House that countries such as Chad in Africa have more media freedom than Greece? Because this is exactly what was presented in the rankings, which you claim. So when you get advice from your Renew colleagues, I suggest you dig a little bit deeper in terms of the reality of the Greek public discourse. We are a very dynamic and vibrant democracy, and I can assure you that freedom of the press is an accepted reality in Greece for many decades now. The Commission is going to publish its recommendations regarding rule of law, we expect them and we will look very carefully at what the Commission has to say. At the end of the day, I think we can trust the Commission to properly assess the state of the rule of law in all European countries. Ms Strik, thank you for your comments. I think you’ve raised some valid points, first of all regarding the lack of solidarity offered to Greece, but also to other countries which are on the external borders of the European Union. When it comes to the migration issue, I would however like to point out that it is the right of every European Member State to protect its borders with full respect for fundamental rights. This is exactly what Greece has been doing for the past three years, and we have been successful in protecting our borders and we have been successful in terms of breaking down the smuggler networks that have really exploited the desperation of weak and traumatised people by encouraging them to embark on a very dangerous journey. When you speak about pushbacks, I would urge you to think more in terms of ‘push—forwards’ rather than pushbacks. We have a statement between the European Union and Turkey, which requests Turkey to cooperate in terms of managing migration flows across the Aegean. When a sailing boat leaves a Turkish marina with 100 or 200 people on board, I think we need to be naive to believe that this is happening without the knowledge of the Turkish authorities. We know very well that Turkey, back in March 2020, weaponised the migration issue and tried to push tens of thousands of desperate people across the Greek border – exactly the same practice that Lukashenko did in Ukraine. There was nothing different. The playbook was written already by Turkey back in March 2020. So please, when you look at these issues, which are sensitive issues, let us not repeat the Turkish propaganda that they have no role in what is happening and that it is the Greeks who are behaving inhumanely in terms of not protecting fundamental rights. We have an independent anti-corruption agency which is looking at allegations. Some of the allegations, yes, are concerning and they need to be further explored. Having said that, I would like to point out that the reception facilities – because you made the point of the reception facilities today – bear no comparison to the reception facilities under the previous, Leftist government. Take a look at the islands now. Go visit Samos or Chios and you will find state of the art reception facilities that were funded by the European Union which have no comparison to the disgrace of Moria, which was a creation of the previous Leftist and very ‘sensitive’ – quote unquote – government when it came to human rights issues. This reality no longer exists. One last point in terms of integration. I think you will find this interesting. Yesterday, I welcomed to my office a 19—year—old Iranian boy. His name is Kourosh. Kourosh made it to Lesvos in 2019. He entered a Greek school. He learned Greek. He gave his entrance exams to a Greek university. He will now be admitted to the best school in Greece when it comes to electrical engineering, having aced his national entrance exams. This is how this government looks at the integration process of people who have reached European shores and have a right to be integrated into European society. Now, when it comes to the point raised by Mr Beck, very quickly, I assure you that when it comes to our purchases of weapon systems, all the important weapon systems that we have purchased over the past three years have been European – and I do believe that we need to purchase more European systems when we have that option, and I believe we need more integration of our defence industry in order to make it more competitive. When it comes to the issues raised by Mr Fragkos regarding the brain drain, I can assure you that, for the first time, many young Greeks who left the country over the past decade in search of a better job are seriously contemplating returning to the country, for two reasons – because, for the first time, we offer many good—paying jobs and because they have an overall confidence that this country is moving in the right direction. We still have a lot of work to do to reverse the brain drain problem, but I think we have made some important first steps. Finally, when it comes to the points raised by Mr Papadimoulis, who was very, very eager to defend the previous government – I understand his point but I think it is improper, sometimes, Madam President to bring issues pertaining to domestic politics to this House – I would only point out one reality, which is, Mr Papadimoulis, that seven years ago there was a referendum which was led by your government, which pushed Greece to the precipice of us exiting the eurozone. It was only because you reversed the decision of the Greek people and made the now—famous ‘kolotumba’, which is a somersault, a U-turn, that you signed the third programme and essentially condemned Greece to four unnecessary years of austerity. This is one of the main reasons you were voted out of power and why we came into power in order to make sure that we move Greece back to a proper growth track. Finally, when it comes, again, to issues regarding the rule of law, we have an opportunity, Madam Speaker – and I will end here – to have a discussion in the Greek Parliament tomorrow regarding these issues. What is a fact today when it comes to independent justice and two of the closest collaborators of Mr Tsipras is that the Minister in charge of anti-corruption has been sent to the highest court of the country accused of tampering with justice and intervening in justice, and a second Minister in the Tsipras government has also been sent to the highest court because he interfered in a public tender regarding broadcasting rights. So this is a track record of your government. You have two of your Ministers who will be held accountable to justice for clear interventions when it comes to the rule of law. So let the facts speak rather than using this Chamber to promote fake news. Thank you again, Madam President, for giving me the opportunity to address the European Parliament.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you, Prime Minister, thank you dear colleagues. That concludes the debate. Written statements (Rule 171)
[EN] Christine | Schneider said from the PPE that in writing. – Regular exchanges with the heads of government of the member states are important in order to improve cooperation between the European Parliament and the national level. During the financial crisis and for a long time afterwards, Greece was considered the EU’s problem child. In this respect, Greece has been able to catch up considerably and is now considered one of the fastest growing economies in Europe. Key issues were the extent to which European integration can be further improved in the areas of energy supply and security. Greece is a strategically important country and protects Europe’s external borders. This requires support from the EU. With regard to the Russian war of aggression against Ukraine, Mitsotakis stressed that there is only one side one can take in this war – the side of Ukraine, which is fighting for its freedom and democracy.
