[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Good morning, we have with us today the Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Xavier Bettel. Prime Minister, dear Xavier, welcome to the European Parliament, and thank you for accepting our invitation to be part of our ‘This is Europe’ series of debates. I take this opportunity to thank you and the people of Luxembourg for your steadfast belief in Europe and your resounding commitment to our shared values; for your leadership in pushing our project forward; and for showing that the limitations of geography are no limit to the potential of a people. We will not forget your unwavering support for Ukraine, for welcoming displaced Ukrainians to your homes, schools and communes and for earmarking almost one fifth of your defence budget to help Ukraine defend itself against the Russian invasion. Allow me to praise you, Prime Minister, for your strong position on holding perpetrators of war crimes to justice. The European Parliament will always push for peace – a real peace, with justice and accountability. And we know that for there to be a peace, there must be a Ukraine. As your government said in a statement earlier this year, Luxembourg ‘will never resign itself to a world in which force prevails over law’. And that is why we have also been able to count on Luxembourg to show firm support for Ukraine on its path to EU membership. For this, Prime Minister, and for so much more, I would like to thank you and assure you that this Parliament will continue to stand for these causes and for our common values with Luxembourg and with you.
[EN] Xavier | Bettel said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Luxembourg. – Madam President, dear Members of the European Parliament, I must tell you that it is a great honour to be here with you once again in this House. I would really like to thank the President for inviting me. And I also thank the Commission for being here this morning, and especially someone I know well. This is the third time in five years that I have spoken here before your House. And I must tell you that, for me, this House is the epicentre of European democracy, and my country is proud to have been home to its General Secretariat for more than seventy years now. When, in 2018, I had the opportunity to address you here in a similar debate, it seemed to many of us that the European Union had just gone through a period of doubt, which could be described as “quasi-existential”, or at least of internal questioning about its near future. The euro crisis and the period of intense migratory pressure in 2015 created divisions that were very, very significant within the Member States, but also within your own assembly. The result of the 2016 referendum in the United Kingdom, as well as the rise of xenophobic and identity-based currents in a number of Member States, even led some to announce that this was the end of the European Union, that we were going to go backwards, that Brexit was only the first and that others would follow one after the other, that we were incapable of acting and that we all risked an implosion of our European Union. And I must tell you that, five years later, I see the opposite – and I am very happy about it. The European Union has had historic crises, and it is true that each time we tend to say that it is even worse than before. But over the past five years, we have experienced crises even more intense than that of 2018. And we have shown that we are up to the challenges. I must also tell you, Madam President, that your institution has more than ever assumed its crucial role in the institutional machinery of the European Union. Following Brexit, we stood in solidarity with Ireland and united to preserve the integrity of our internal market. Faced with COVID-19 – and we had some difficulties, I admit, at the beginning – we managed to maintain the free movement of citizens and goods and tried to limit the damage. And I know what I am talking about, with 200,000 cross-border workers working in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg – and I already said this earlier during the press conference – a country where, if we had closed the borders, I would not have had staff in hospitals, people would have died one after the other. And it was a reflex. We saw the tensions. Some thought that closing the borders would stop the virus. Good for them. We saw that this wasn't the case. We also saw that we, as the European Union, managed to secure contracts. So we can discuss, everyone has their own position, but imagine if we had left the vaccines to the free market. I can admit, I admit, budget-wise, Luxembourg could have managed to buy 600,000 vaccines. But how would we have explained to other members of the European Union that, because they don't have the means, well, COVID-19 is bad luck for them. And it's thanks to the Commission, thanks to this joint purchase, that we managed to distribute these vaccines fairly and that on the same day, whether you're Bulgarian, Romanian, Luxembourgish, Maltese, or Irish, you had the chance to be able to get vaccinated. This is Europe. And yet, we forget it too easily. (Applause) We have also succeeded in issuing common debt to finance the post-COVID-19 recovery through the NextGenerationEU program. And I must say, without the help of your Parliament, we might not have succeeded in having a conditionality mechanism also linking the European budget and recovery plans to respect for the rule of law in the Member States. Furthermore, our unity in the face of the war in Ukraine on the political and economic levels, in terms of sanctions, humanitarian and military aid, but also in welcoming refugees, has shown that the European Union is also a credible geopolitical actor. Faced with the dual climate and energy crisis – we too often tend to forget this – we have also succeeded in considerably reducing our consumption while accelerating the transition to an energy system based essentially on renewable energies. This is not only a moral and environmental imperative; This is certainly an economic necessity, but also a geopolitical one, and it is about the legacy we want to leave to future generations. If, for some, it is "after me, the deluge", do nothing. But if we want to leave the quality of life we enjoy today to future generations, it is high time to act. And I must thank you, Madam President, also for the leadership of your assembly, precisely in this debate and this desire to fight against climate change. You are elected by the citizens, you represent the citizens. And very often, we have the impression that the citizens are more cautious than we are, when that is not true. I just presented, with our ministers of the environment, energy and the economy, on Monday, the results of a citizen consultation that we conducted with one hundred citizens. These hundred citizens formulated proposals, many of which are included in the national plan – the PNEC, as we call it here, for energy and climate – which will be submitted to the European Commission. And believe me, our citizens are going further than we imagined and even dared to do. Citizens expect us to also provide answers to their expectations. So, it was no longer top-down; ideas came from below, precisely to influence policy. From time to time, we are afraid of our citizens. Don't discover them every five years during elections. Don't be afraid of contact, don't be afraid to consult them. Even if we are elected, even if we are in a parliamentary representation, let your citizens speak from time to time. You will be surprised by the courage they have in the face of the hesitations we may have. So, the objective of these reminders is also to say that we must not rest on our laurels. I know my time is limited, so I will be rather brief on certain subjects. But I would just like to emphasize the need to remain open, within our Union and to the world, in a time when tensions are increasing and protectionism is the first reflex of everyone as soon as we talk about openness, on European values and fundamental rights, as well as on the need for our Union to continue to rise to the challenge of a war that is upon us. During the most difficult moments of the pandemic, I told you that we had shown that working together was the solution. And I told you this earlier, with vaccines as well as with cross-border workers. But little Luxembourg has taken on French patients. That, for me, is what the European Union is all about: seeing how we can build something together. Thanks to the staff who came from across the border, we were able to take patients who came from across the border. That's what the European Union is all about: not closing in on ourselves and saying it's not our problem. Our problems are common, and the best solution to solving common problems is common solutions, not navel-gazing and withdrawal. When we talk about borders today, it has become a subject, I must tell you, that surprises me. I belong to a generation that has not experienced war. Many of us have not experienced war. But in your assembly, Madam President, many of your elected representatives and also in my Council have experienced an Iron Curtain. They have experienced a wall. They knew what it meant to be divided. Do we, the European Union, now want to send the message that the political will would be to rebuild walls? For me, Europe means tearing down the walls that existed on our continent. Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past. (Applause) Madam President, I would also like to mention the common market on the occasion of its anniversary. According to a study by the European Parliament's services, the internal market has led to the creation of 56 million jobs within the European Union and a structural increase in the Union's GDP of around 9%. It not only brings us prosperity, but is also the origin of our common rules and standards in social, environmental, consumer protection, and food safety matters. While state aid can act as a "bridge," enabling our industrial fabric and SMEs to weather troubled times, it will be the internal market and its regulatory environment that will enable them to remain competitive in the long term, especially at the global level. Gleichzeitig cann sich aber eine wettbewerbsfähige EU-Wirtschaft nicht nur auf den Binnenmarkt stützen. If there is an Offenheit against the Rest of the World, it has also been Investitionsflüsse anbelangt. Es ist wichtig, dass wir als EU unch weiterhin die Mittel geben, uns gegen wirtschaftlichen Zwang sowie gegen Investitionen zu schützen, die ein Sicherheitsrisiko darstellen. Vieles wurde in den letzten Wochen und Monaten zum Konzept der strategygischen Autonomie Europas gesagt. Lassen Sie mich hier dazu ganz klar sagen: Strategische Autonomie bedeutet für mich weder Protectionismus noch Abkehr von Freunden und engen Partnern noch Äquidistanz zwischen Alliierten und dem Rest der Welt. And it has a bislang language that is not the same as the life and standards of its history in the European Union, which is why it is also a part of the strategy of Autonomy in its current state. If you take a few of these items, you will have to change the poles and turn them on again. Ursula von der Leyen and Thierry Breton have introduced the Net Zero Industry Act and the Chips Act and the Critical Raw Materials Act. It is not a matter for the Rat and Parliament, but also for the protection of the law. Für uns – Luxemburg – soll Offenheit ein wesentlicher Bestandteil unserer Bemühungen für mehr strategische Autonomie sein. Offene Märkte, gekoppelt mit einem level playing field speziell bei Umwelt-, Klima- und Menschenrechtsfragen, waren und werden auch in Zukunft die Grundlage unseres Wohlstands sein. Protectionismus macht arm. Aber nicht nur das. Protektionismus macht in letzter Konsequenz trotzdem auch noch abhängig. Strategische Autonomie heißt im Gegenteil Diversifikation der Lieferketten – gerne und bevorzugt auch in Richtung derer, die unsere Werte teilen und die, genau wie wir, das Erreichen der Ziele des Pariser Abkommens ernst nehmen. Strategische Autonomie heißt auch, eine proaktive Europäische Industriepolitik zu führen, um Herstellung und Wertschöpfung in Europa, besonders im Kontext der ünen und digitalen Transition, zu fördern, die Bezugsquellen von kritischen Rohmaterialien sicherzustellen und zu diversifizieren, anstatt alles oder zu viel auf eine selbe Karte zu setzen, sich aus der Abhängigkeit von fossilen Energieträgern zu befreien und europäische Strom- und auch Wasserstoffproduktions- und —verteilungsnetze aufzubauen und sich auf erneuerbare Energien zu base sowie schließlich also Technologieentwicklung und Innovationen Made in Europe zu fördern und zu schützen. In those days, we are still in charge of offending strategic autonomy. And when I’m talking about openness, ladies and gentlemen, I cannot avoid touching upon the issue of a truly common European migration policy. I agree that, in order for Schengen to work, we need to be in a position to better regulate and control access to the Schengen Area. However, for me, that does not and can in no way imply that we Europeans do not have a legal obligation and a moral duty to offer those who seek international protection a realistic possibility to do so, and to grant international protection to those who qualify for it. As I told my colleagues at the February European Council, border walls are not only costly and questionable from a political point of view, but they are not effective in stopping irregular migration. We have to improve the surveillance of our external borders and engage with international partners on issues like returns or the management of migratory flows, or addressing the root causes of irregular migration and setting up possibilities for regular migration. At the same time, the respect for fundamental rights, as well as international humanitarian law, should be the guiding principle for common European migration policy that preserves and strengthens our credibility with our neighbors and other third party countries. The external dimension can only be complementary to the internal dimension. A common European migration policy needs to be fair, resilient, rules-based and characterized by the right balance between solidarity and responsibility. For me, the European Asylum and Migration Pact and the related preparatory work by the successive French, Czech and Swedish presidencies represent the only solution on the table with the potential to achieve this balance. Let us not give up on the pact and let us try to hammer out an agreement before the end of this legislature, using the joint roadmap of the European Parliament and the Council as our compass to this end. For me, one of the central characteristics of the European project has been the fact that it’s always been solidly anchored in the respect for fundamental rights and rule of law. This was my main theme of my speech before this plenary last November. And as I told you in the press conference, I had a speech prepared about technical matters, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, but, Roberta, you showed us the video of Simone Veil and this changed my whole speech. You know who Simone Veil was, but we are remembering today. You have this yellow star on you. Simone Veil had not only a yellow star or flower; she was marked for life – she was Jewish. She fought, during her political engagement, for women’s rights and, for me, she represents Europe. This peace project. This project of respecting people how they are. And so that is the reason I want to officially apologize to all my team, who usually prepare long speeches and I don’t very often stick to them. But it was for me important to recall that. For me, you have to continue to fight for these rights, for this rule of law and for these human rights. Madam President, the defense of the rule of law and the fundamental rights of citizens must remain the backbone of this European Union, and we cannot change the rules depending on who is in power. The European Parliament is active on the ground in this area, and I would especially like to highlight the role you have played in establishing a conditionality mechanism linked to the rule of law for the multiannual financial framework and for NextGenerationEU. The developments of recent months have clearly shown us that this mechanism is certainly perfectible, but that it works. Add to this the funds suspended as part of the submission of certain national recovery plans until the achievement of certain mid-term objectives in terms of the rule of law, the funds suspended as part of the Financial Regulation, as well as the infringement procedures that the Commission has launched, including that of the Hungarian anti-LGBT+ law, supported by fifteen countries before the Commission. Madam President, I was at the European Council just after Viktor Orbán announced the law he wanted to pass on the media, following which it is no longer possible to talk about homosexuality on television, on the radio, or in education. We can no longer talk about it. If someone in this assembly thinks that one becomes homosexual because they watched television... If someone thinks that they became homosexual because they listened to a song... You have understood nothing. The hardest thing for a homosexual is to accept themselves. (Applause) We are not asking for pity, we are not asking for solidarity, we are not asking for compassion, we are just asking for respect. So, giving the impression that because you were born like that it’s better to have a double life, or to hide it, and not be able to live… Do we know how many young people commit suicide because they can’t communicate about their own homosexuality? Stigmatizing them and telling them that it’s the fault of education, culture, the audiovisual sector, is for me contrary to what the European Union is, to its openness and its tolerance… The day I understood what I was and accepted myself, my friends said to me: “Finally!” My family said to me: “Finally!” But to think that in other countries, I wouldn’t even have the right to say it without risking a sentence – in some countries, not in the European Union – of imprisonment or even the death penalty! And to think that in the European Union, soon, I will no longer be able to talk about it with anyone else, except anonymously, because I would risk perverting the younger generations!… I am ashamed, Madam President, that some colleagues want to win votes on the backs of minorities. It has already started like that, in our history… (Applause) I think, Madam President, that we must complete our toolbox regarding human rights and the rights of minorities. In view of the challenges – financial, climatic, security, industrial and social – that await us in the coming years, I will also ask for more solidarity and resources, which will also determine our political action. Allow me, Madam President, to end my speech with this aggression, this war of aggression launched by Russia against Ukraine. It has been taking place on our doorstep for more than a year now, and I think that the biggest surprise has been our unity. Many expected that, from the start, things would go to pot and everyone would go their separate ways. Our strength is our unity. The European Union is never as strong as when united. Individual states don't represent much – don't take this the wrong way – but the European Union is strong. I see that, at present, the peace we would like to have right away is not within our reach. I'm being very honest with you: I don't envisage it here, now, right away. We can clearly see that the United Nations Charter is being violated, and you said so, Madam President: Luxembourg does not want impunity. We cannot say that part of the deal will be impunity in relation to what is happening today in Ukraine. And let me quote Robert Schuman, a native of Luxembourg, in his 1950 declaration: "World peace cannot be safeguarded without creative efforts commensurate with the dangers that threaten it." These words still resonate strongly today, and it is our historic duty to commit to them, to pursue them, to fulfill them, and therefore to react in a united manner in the face of unacceptable Russian aggression. Sanction the aggressor, continue to financially support Ukraine, to supply it with weapons. You have said it: we ourselves have released a large part of our budget for Ukraine, so that they can take what they need. It will also require creative efforts, then, and to use the enlargement policy as a geopolitical tool, accompanying Ukraine as a candidate on the long and difficult road to accession. Another creative effort will consist of conducting a serious discussion on the functioning, from an institutional point of view certainly, but also especially from a budgetary and financial point of view, of a European Union that will expand in the next two decades. Final creative efforts: those that will mobilize the resources necessary to rebuild Ukraine and build a European order that will put an end to the wars on our continent once and for all. We cannot, Madam President, disappoint our citizens once again. We must live up to the efforts that await us, whether in terms of respect for the rule of law, the climate, commitment to Ukraine, or this desire to build something that will allow us, together, to go further. I believe it was Churchill who said: "Alone we go faster, together we go further." As Prime Minister of Luxembourg for almost ten years, I know that without this Europe I might not be here before you today, free, free to express myself freely without risking sanctions. Whether you are from the far left or the far right, you are fighting here, but with ideas and words, not with weapons, not with fists, not with threats. Thank you for holding strong the values of this democracy in this house and not falling under the sirens of populism.
[EN] Isabel | Wiseler-Lima said from the PPE that on behalf of the EPP Group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, the European Union, and Luxembourg within it, continues to be a haven that attracts and welcomes. Our strength today lies in this. But the European Union is also at a crossroads. We need more Europe to face a world that has become much more hostile to democracies and which has seen the return of war on the European continent, due to an autocratic and hegemonic Russia that invaded Ukraine. We need more Europe for more autonomy, particularly in relation to China, and the crises that have followed one another in recent years have also brought this certainty to our fellow citizens. The COVID-19 pandemic has aroused among the citizens of the Union the desire for a European Health Union. It seems to me, moreover, in this context, Prime Minister, that Luxembourg should play a leading role, especially since we have the European Health and Digital Executive Agency in Luxembourg. The pandemic has also resulted in shortages and has shown that for essential goods, whether medicines, food, or vital technology, we cannot depend on other continents. We must bring production back to Europe, including to Luxembourg, both to guarantee our autonomy and with environmental protection in mind. And the same goes for our security. Our fellow citizens know that peace is not a given and that European defense has become essential. We need a Union militarily capable of making decisions, and autonomous decisions. The dependencies in which we are entangled—energy, economic, and military—are weakening us. We need autonomy of decision and de facto autonomy. This will—or will not—be done together. In the European Union, each country has a voice that matters. We expect Luxembourg to take these realities into account in its foreign policy and, within the European Union, to act in favour of a powerful Union for our security and peace.
[EN] Iratxe | García Pérez said from the S-D that On behalf of the S&D Group. – Madam President, Mr. Bettel, welcome to the European Parliament. You appear before this House as a representative of a country, Luxembourg, traditionally at the forefront of European integration. More than seven decades after Luxembourg laid the foundations of the Benelux, our Union is facing one of the greatest changes in our history. Mr. Bettel, as you described in your speech, the time has come to decide how we want to continue building Europe. And I will add something else: with whom we want to continue building Europe. Recent events show that the European Union is witnessing a moment in which some are abandoning their moderation, and the far right, with hateful policies against science, women, LGBTI people, and immigrants, is undermining the progress achieved. In Poland, women are persecuted and convicted for defending their rights. In Italy, Ms. Meloni is stifling the rights of LGBTI people to register the children of same-sex couples and is declaring a state of emergency to eliminate all protections for immigrants. Speaking of another fundamental challenge you mentioned, the climate, in Spain, the People's Party and the far-right Vox party are endangering the future of a natural gem like Doñana, and political leaders like the vice president of my region, Castile and León, say we should leave the children alone, as they will decide when they grow up whether CO2 is a polluting gas or not. For all these reasons, it's time to choose where we want to be in history. Ladies and gentlemen, in the context of Putin's war against Ukraine, our citizens are struggling to find decent work, buy affordable housing, or guarantee their children an education. And at the same time, the number of millionaires is increasing. How can we ask citizens to resist when multinational companies barely pay taxes in the European Union? Mr. Bettel, we must also commit to a fair tax policy. We Social Democrats know where we're going. We will continue to lead the response to all these challenges. We will continue to defend the rule of law to protect minorities from the attacks of far-right forces. The time has come to commit. I, like you, am also grateful to those who help me write excellent speeches. I had a way of ending by asking you which side you wanted to be on in this European construction. After your speech, I don't need to ask you, and therefore, I will thank you for your commitment to continuing to build a fairer, more social, and more equal Europe.
[EN] Stéphane | Séjourné said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew Group. – Madam President, it is a real pleasure to welcome the Prime Minister of Luxembourg here in our Chamber. Mr. Prime Minister, your country has, since the beginnings of European integration, contributed very substantially to our European Union. I would even like to say that if, proportionally to the size of the countries, all European countries had contributed as much, both to the construction and to our organization, perhaps we would have passed a certain number of stages – which we are still discussing. I would first like to say to you, Mr. Prime Minister, that you have been personally faithful to the history of your country. You strongly defended your community of values at the European Council. You did so once again in your speech before the European Parliament. Our group, Renew Europe, knows that it can count on you to carry forward our projects, the conditionality of funds on respect for the rule of law, the Green Deal, European sovereignty – you also mentioned this in parallel. We are with you, as are many of my colleagues in other political groups, when you denounce the excesses of Viktor Orban, the absurdities of the populists. Your voice carries, and through you that of the defenders of liberal democracies throughout Europe. The European Union is indeed the shield of liberal democracy, but we also know its imperfections in terms of democracy and the effectiveness of decision-making. You, who sit on the European Council, are also well placed to see these difficulties, both in time and in the way decisions are made today in Europe. So Europe has certainly shown its flexibility – you also mentioned this in the constitutional framework that we know – in the context of crises, with strong responses to COVID-19, the economic crisis, the Russian invasion of Ukraine; with efficiency, a determination to act both here, in the European Parliament, and at the same time within the Council. The Conference on the Future of Europe laid the foundations for reflection. My group regrets that we cannot go a little further, but certainly, economic, environmental, and geopolitical emergencies take priority. I would perhaps like to question you on one issue. It is time for us to move towards elections and, as you know, with transnational lists and also with a right of initiative in the European Parliament. I know that you are also pushing these issues. So, Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for your trust, thank you for your values, and one question: are you ready, and how can we go further in our European organization and institutional framework?
[EN] Philippe | Lamberts said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Greens/EFA Group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, Xavier, and welcome! I am a little moved because I have always had a certain fondness, even a strong fondness, for the Grand Duchy. You should know that for ten years in my previous life, I was a sales representative for a large firm, and my main client was in Colmar-Berg, in the Grand Duchy. Can you guess who I am talking about? And for them, I was the Grand Duke, you know. […] Sorry? […] No, it wasn’t the Grand Duke. It’s right next door. But what a joy! What a joy to have you here and to have been able to hear your threefold plea! A plea first and foremost for our Union. So, it is certain that, for small countries like ours, sovereignty in the 21st century can only be built together. But, as one of your predecessors, who was later President of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, said, in Europe, there are two kinds of countries: small countries and those that have not yet understood that they are small. I think he was right about that. And I am indeed delighted that, in the Union, unity has prevailed in the face of the pandemic, in the face of war, and I believe that this is what makes us strong. But this Union is not just any union. It is a union founded first and foremost – and you said so – on values. I never forget the compass that Article 2 of the Treaties represents for us, which lists the values on which the European Union is built, starting with respect for human dignity. Not the dignity of European citizens. Human dignity. Whatever their gender, sexual orientation, origin, or beliefs, a human being is a human being and they have the right to respect. I find your plea on this subject particularly moving. And to be able to count on you as a defender of these values in the Council, I want to say that, in fact, this should not be extraordinary. But I note that, within the Council, this is not unanimously shared. And so to have champions of the fundamental values of the Union within the Council, for us this is of absolutely central importance. Finally, concerning your plea for the ecological transition, I often said to myself: "But ultimately, among the twenty-seven heads of state or government, who is really the champion of the Green Deal?" Apart from you, I don't see many people. Really, who understands the centrality of this challenge, its crucial importance for our future, obviously, in the face of a planet that could become uninhabitable, and for our economic future? And you understand that. It doesn't surprise me that our two political families are associated within the Luxembourg government. And long may it last! In any case, I would like to thank you for all of this. Keep going, don't give up. You know that we are by your side. We defend the same values.
[EN] Nicola | Procaccini said from the ECR that On behalf of the ECR Group. – Madam President, Mr. Prime Minister, welcome. The magnificent castles of Luxembourg remind us of our continent's history. A history spanning over a thousand years that has produced a civilization we are proud of, one we must cherish and preserve. I know I'm telling you nothing new when I remind you that Luxembourg is also notorious for some overly aggressive tax practices. This allows many companies to reduce or avoid paying taxes in their home countries, generating unfair competition within the European Union. I'm sure you'll agree with me that, if we want to ensure proper economic development, we must defend the real economy over an economy based solely on finance. Luxembourg is also home to Schengen, the birthplace of the agreement that established a common area of free movement, abolishing internal borders within the Union. This is undoubtedly one of the most important achievements in cooperation between European states. The terrible paradox today is that internal movement is no longer as free as it should be, unlike external movement. On the one hand, borders are being built to thwart the secondary movements of illegal migrants between European countries, such as between France and Italy. On the other, there are calls for opening external borders to illegal immigration, transforming the countries of first entry into vast refugee camps or open-air reception centers. This approach is often accompanied by harsh public criticism of the countries on the European Union's external borders, claiming they are not welcoming enough. However, if an illegal migrant manages to cross the internal border, he or she is captured like an animal by the police and deported to the country where he or she first landed. It is this hypocrisy that we have long denounced and which we fight with determination, realism, and humanity. The Europe we conservatives believe in is shaped by the great national histories that compose it. This is why we adopt Luxembourg's motto: "We want to remain what we are."
[EN] Harald | Vilimsky said from the ID that on behalf of the ID Group. – Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, it takes a fair amount of black humor to step up to the rostrum like the previous speakers and praise the state of Europe to the skies. The fact is that the two large groups in this House are in real trouble. The authorities are marching in on the Social Democrats and, in effect, arresting representatives from the plenary chamber. Cash is being found at home – in plastic bags – and confiscated. The European Public Prosecutor’s Office is investigating the other large group, the European People’s Party, because of the procurement of vaccines related to the coronavirus. I will come back to this. In debates like today’s, it would be good to practice a bit of self-reflection and not to gloat in a way that borders on humor. Whenever big decisions had to be made, whenever the right path should and wanted to be sought, you have taken a wrong turn. It started in 2016, when the British said: thank you, we've had enough, goodbye, we're leaving! They should have responded by transferring more powers to the member states, not scolding the British for saying they were leaving, but treating them with respect and dignity. They failed to do that. They also failed to make the right decisions during the 2015 migration crisis, which continues to this day. It is not just labor market problems, not just social problems, not just cultural problems that have reached this continent. We have also - since we are already talking about commemoration today - allowed any amount of terror and crime onto the continent. Let me just remind you: Brussels, the capital of Europe, where the airport was blown up, killing over 30 people; the Christmas market here in Strasbourg a few years ago when there was an Islamist attack; or - since we are in France - Paris and the Bataclan theater. Don't you remember that? Draw the right conclusions from this misguided policy. Corona: You have buried all the rules of a free Europe and pursued a policy where lockdowns triggered bankruptcies and mental health problems, maneuvering the entire continent into a problematic situation – completely unnecessarily, as we know today. There are many more examples where you have taken the wrong turn on the Ukraine-Russia issue, fueling war instead of wishing for peace. I say: You haven't achieved much. We now have insects in our food. Bravo to this European Union... (The President cuts off the speaker.)
[EN] Manon | Aubry said from the The Left that on behalf of The Left group. – Madam President, Mr. Bettel, I have a riddle for you. What do Tiger Woods, Brad Pitt, the Hermès family, Shakira, the Prince of Saudi Arabia, Bernard Arnault, the Italian mafia, and the Russian underworld have in common? They all have an astonishing passion for your country, Luxembourg. You tell me that you meet some very nice people there. Well, the reality is that they are not really there. Because the reality is that you only meet their shell companies, which are domiciled, for example, at 6 rue Eugène Ruppert. It is a rather ordinary building, Mr. Bettel. And in this building, there are no fewer than 1,810 companies, which magically manage to share these premises. Mr. Prime Minister, perhaps you can explain to us how Luxembourg is able to escape the laws of physics in this way. You actually know the answer. Scandal after scandal, we find these companies, which are in fact nothing more than mailboxes whose sole role is to enable large-scale tax evasion. The reality, Mr. Bettel, is that you are at the head of a tax haven. A tax haven that organizes a veritable organized theft in the heart of Europe, and that even today no one can or wants to channel you. Mr. Bettel, you have talked a lot about opening the borders. I agree with that, for once. But, strangely, when it comes to the money of the rich or multinationals, it's a one-way street. It enters Luxembourg, but never leaves. The consequence of this heist of the century is social destruction, the destruction of our public services, the destruction of our pensions. Because, strangely, those who are so quick to save on everything are also those who never seek to recover the billions stolen from tax evaders. So allow me in conclusion, Mr Bettel, to tell you that your vibrant plea for a Europe of cooperation and solidarity could move us, I must admit, if it were not often, in reality, a shell as empty as the fictitious companies at 6 rue Eugène Ruppert.
[EN] Tatjana | Ždanoka said from the NI that – Madam President, dear Mr Bettel, you told in your speech about the rule of law in the European Union. But do you agree that the rule of law toolbox, recently introduced, is not working? By my opinion, just the disappearance of the resolutions of rule of law in Spain, Malta and Greece in this plenary is approval of this fact. We commemorate today the uprising in the Warsaw Ghetto. My grandparents were thrown into the Riga Ghetto – I am from Latvia – and then killed. Therefore, for me, a problem of big concern is the growing number of political prisoners in the Baltic states. In my statelet, the series of trials of 14 journalists started last week. They are accused of violating EU sanctions and facing up to four years in prison. In neighbouring Lithuania, another journalist, is imprisoned for six years. The same happens in Estonia ... (The President cut off the speaker)
[EN] Paulo | Rangel said from the PPE that – Madam President, dear Prime Minister, Commissioner, first, let me thank you and congratulate you for reinforcing the tradition of Luxembourg, Commissioners, Presidents of Commission and Prime Ministers in fighting for rule of law, for human rights, for the rights of minorities. Because I remember that, even against the first steps of wrongdoing of Orbán, Viviane Reding was always with the red alarm, and not by chance, Juncker was not voted by Orbán as President of the Commission. And so this is Luxembourg always giving the example and you keep this tradition and reinforce it. Then let me say as a Portuguese, that we experienced the European Union before we were Members because of the experience of our citizens in Luxembourg. They were so well received, that this was the true European spirit. And then let me put a political question, because at some time, at some moment, you said that peace could be obtained in Ukraine if there was a meeting between Xi Jinping and Biden. And I have to say that I am quite sceptical about this statement and I would like to know how do you envisage a peace process when you try to design this new formulation? Because I see with President Lula now what he is saying and these are not good news for us and not good news for Brazilian external policy. So I would like your comment on this.
[EN] Marc | Angel said from the S-D that – Madam President, Prime Minister, I vividly remember our time together in Luxembourg politics, sometimes within the same coalition, sometimes separated by political power relations, but always united in the ambition to improve people's lives. Thank you for being with us today. I am proud that Luxembourg, a founding member, has always supported an ambitious European project and acted as a driving force for European integration, despite its small size. Prime Minister, solidarity, the rule of law, and our fundamental values are more important than ever in a changing world. I count on you to continue to defend these principles, in Europe and elsewhere, as you have always done. The Ukrainian people deserve our full solidarity in their fight against the Russian aggressor and in defending our values. It is essential, as you said, to preserve European unity on this issue. Solidarity also requires a determined fight against social inequality. Deepening the social dimension of Europe, as citizens demanded at the Conference on the Future of Europe, is crucial. And the conference was a fantastic exercise, during which we gave thousands of citizens a voice. European solidarity must also be demonstrated on tax issues. While I welcome the considerable reforms implemented over the last decade in Luxembourg and within the EU, I hope these efforts will continue. We must also extend our solidarity to those fleeing war and persecution. My Socialist and Democrat Group welcomes the fact that Luxembourg continues to defend a humane position in a debate whose tone continues to harden in the Council. It is also of vital importance, as you have pointed out, to reach an agreement on the migration pact before the European elections. Mr. Prime Minister, the European Union is setting itself ambitious objectives, whether in the fight against climate change, digitalization, or defense. And to do this, it must renew itself, adapt its operating rules and its economic and social governance, redefine the framework of its budgetary resources and, where appropriate, amend the treaties. I hope that Luxembourg will be ready, once again, to support and promote ambitious approaches in the European interest.
[EN] Charles | Goerens said from the Renew that – Madam President, allow me to begin with a quote from our friend Philippe Lamberts, and to extend a warm “Gudde moien” to you and your team, Prime Minister. One might wonder about the added value of a small country in a world where everything seems to boil down to a power struggle: China-USA, aggressor countries versus oppressed countries, authoritarian regimes versus liberal democracies… Well, the added value of a small state is its refusal to accommodate itself to a world in which the number of cannon shots, the capacity for disinformation or its means of intimidation count. Let us be clear: a country is not necessarily virtuous because it is smaller, far from it! A country is not necessarily exemplary because it does not have the means to crush others. But a small country can be useful, even very useful, because it knows how to grasp at an early stage the existential threats posed to it by small, medium, and large powers. The Prime Minister of a small state therefore knows what he is talking about when he tries to convince others (who, so to speak, are all larger than him) of the indispensable nature of European integration. Like his fellow citizens, he feels the need to unite, to cooperate, to pool the efforts of the 27 and, above all, to alert his partners to the consequences of inaction, of non-Europe. So European integration is an answer? No, it is the answer to all these concerns. Do you want proof? Well, Robert Schuman, foreign minister of a large country, lived his first twenty years in the country that is mine, that is Xavier's, that is his predecessors Jean-Claude Juncker, Jacques Santer, Gaston Thorn, and Pierre Werner. Do you think it is a coincidence that we have all seen them or that we all see them flinching in the same way, favouring law over force in all circumstances, and rubbing shoulders with the harsh realities of a world where only power relations seem to matter? It seems to me wise to remind those who are great within the European Union that there are those even greater than them outside it.
[EN] Tilly | Metz said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, Commissioner, dear Prime Minister – moien, léiwe Xavier –, it is always a pleasure to see you in the European Parliament. Historically and still today, Luxembourg is at the heart of the European project, and we must honor our role as one of the three European capitals. In our Union of 27, even a small country like ours has its place in the negotiations and can make a difference. I am, of course, proud of the Luxembourg government's commitment against nuclear power, which, we agree, is neither green, safe, nor renewable. Thank you, therefore, for the support you are giving to our Minister of Energy, Mr. Claude Turmes, and to the complaint against the taxonomy. So let's talk about finance: as one of the largest financial markets in Europe, we have a special responsibility to implement the ecological transition and promote social justice beyond the Union. This is why I would like Luxembourg to play a pioneering role in the area of corporate duty of care. Will Luxembourg ultimately support the inclusion of the financial sector in this directive? The directive is precisely an opportunity for Luxembourg to clearly position itself as a leader in truly sustainable finance, respectful of human rights and environmental law.
[EN] Jorge | Buxadé Villalba said from the ECR that – Mr. President, Mr. Bettel, you are the president of a founding country of the European Community. Why betray the founding Treaty? Europe is its nations; it is the economic and social progress of the Member States, not a power hijacked by elites serving a globalist agenda. Europe is a space of freedom, not a swamp of self-proclaimed vulnerable groups seeking to impose their particular dictatorship over the majority of Europeans. Europe is a space of security, not a place where borders are stormed and the assailants are applauded. Europe is the effort for the constant improvement of living and working conditions, balanced trade, fair competition, and sustainable economic development, not the adoption of regulations that cripple the growth of our companies and prevent them from competing on equal terms under the pretext of climate change. Europe is solidarity among European nations, not criminalizing Hungary, Poland, and Italy, while showering Morocco with European money so that their products can illegally invade our supermarkets. Europe is respect for the United Nations Charter, life, family, and the dignity of all people. Europe is freedom of thought, not cancel culture. It is a cross in every nation, from the North Cape to Ceuta and Melilla... (The president cuts the speaker off).
[EN] Anders | Vistisen said from the ID that – Madam President! Mr Prime Minister! The refugee and migrant crisis in Europe is once again spiraling completely out of control. We see women, men, and even children drowning in the Mediterranean every single day. We see time and time again that the human traffickers and despots who live in our immediate vicinity in Turkey, in North Africa, are only getting richer and richer. And we see the cultural impact that so many welfare migrants – which is most of those who come to Europe, when we look at the asylum rates – have here on the continent, have on the populations of European countries, have on cohesion and on community. That is why we in the Danish People's Party and the ID Group have long had a solution that solves the problem. We know this: The Australian model, where you have a push-back and where you have asylum processing in third countries, will effectively solve the challenges of crime, of illegal migration and of the cultural impact it has on the European continent. We in the Danish People's Party are pleased that the Danish government, which consists of good colleagues here from the European Parliament such as the Danish Social Democrats, the Liberals and the Moderates, who sit on Renew, is now officially in favour of introducing a form of Australian model at European level. We therefore also hope that the Danish government's proposal can be promoted in the Council, because we know how hopeless this Parliament is when it comes to tackling the real problems when it comes to the European migrant challenge. The problem is that the weakest refugees, those who have it the worst, those who do not have the means to smuggle people, those who cannot make it through the desert, all those who really need our protection, we leave them in the camps, while the strong, those who have the means, those who can help smugglers with their disgusting business model, are given far too much access to Europe. I hope at least that Luxembourg will wake up and follow the Danish example.
[EN] Marc | Botenga said from the The Left that – Madam President, Prime Minister, good morning, welcome. We belong to different political camps. We defend the working class camp. You are more on the side of bankers' tax evasion, but you have taught an important lesson, I think, to the European Commission and some of my colleagues, and I thank you for that. Because you know that the European Commission has talked about banning TikTok, which they said "collects data." Well, it's probably true, we have no trust in this multinational, but Google and Facebook are no better. Last night, I tried to buy shoes on Google. This morning, I found myself with a news feed full of ads for the new shoes. Well, we can't trust these people either. But, strangely, the European Commission is not calling for a ban on Facebook, Google, and others. In fact, let's be honest, when the Commission calls for a ban on TikTok, it is obeying the United States. The United States is afraid of TikTok because many people, especially young people, now prefer TikTok to Facebook and others. And the United States would like us to limit ourselves to using American products, to limit ourselves to consuming American information, to make ourselves completely dependent on them. However, in a vision of European strategic autonomy, this vision has no place. The Commission obeys, but you said, I'm not banning TikTok just because it's Chinese. You're right, we must protect our data from all social networks. We're not going to be lectured by American boomers who don't know whether TikTok connects to Wi-Fi or not. Frankly, Europe is better than that.
[EN] Tamás | Deutsch said from the NI that – Madam President! Luxembourg is one of the founders of the European community. We therefore have special respect for you. It is an honor, Prime Minister, that we can exchange ideas here, in the European Parliament. Prime Minister, it is always good to listen when you talk about your found and accepted identity, and partly in this context, you speak out against stigmatization. Prime Minister, I ask you not to stigmatize those with a different identity, different convictions, different faiths, different political opinions than you. I respectfully ask Prime Minister not to classify the Hungarian child protection law as a homophobic law, stating an untruth, because the Hungarian child protection law is about one thing only: how to protect the inalienable right of parents to raise their children.
[EN] Ioan-Rareş | Bogdan said from the PPE that – Madam President, Luxembourg is the most Euro-optimistic state in the EU, and Romania is now, after the unjust decision in December on Schengen expansion, the most Euro-pessimistic, after being in the top 5 most optimistic pro-European countries for 15 years. No one can but anticipate a growing state of concern in Bucharest. Romanians have been hit hard by the Eurosystem by not accepting them in the Schengen area. This after being treated as second-class European people, through much lower subsidies for farmers. These are just two examples, but the list is long. I think that some underground negotiations are taking place over the heads of Eastern European citizens, ignoring their desire for dignity. In football, these are called tables. When will these scandalous negotiations that ignore the aspirations of Romanians end? Who decides over their heads, in their name, that the European Schengen legislation must be brilliantly ignored? If instead of Romania it had been Germany or France or the Netherlands or Austria, would things have happened the same way? Well, Romania is not a second-rate country and is coping brilliantly with the geostrategic crisis triggered by Putin. Ukrainian refugees found help in Romania and that was before the Union released money for them. Romania is the main support of the Republic of Moldova to resist Moscow's blackmail. If we do not get out of the era of hypocrisy, if we do not turn our face to the real problems of European citizens, if we do not realize that Russia is applying the divide et impera principle, it will cost us dearly and we will only be able to see that the European Union is weakened primarily from within, through the indecision of some and the vile decision of others. The representative institutions of the European Union must treat citizens equally. Now they do not. I hear speeches about a common border policy and about fences. What common policy are we talking about? There are fences right now inside the EU, which Romanian carriers can only cross after kilometer-long queues at the Schengen borders. Mr Bettel said that the European Union is only strong if it is united. I agree, but without Romania in Schengen, the Union ... (The President cut off the speaker) .
[EN] Gabriele | Bischoff said from the S-D that – Madam President, Prime Minister Bettel, your speech was a welcome relief. One year before the European elections – I mean, some people are already feeling the populism booster again. Others are talking about self-reflection and don’t even know how to spell it. You started with self-reflection, the lessons we learned from COVID: first close borders, then procure vaccines together – that is the way forward. But that also means we need more powers for future pandemics in order to combat them across borders. I also liked that you reiterated the plea not to be afraid of the citizens. We had the Conference on the Future of Europe. I don’t think anyone in this room is afraid of the citizens’ proposals. On the contrary: we are in the process of implementing them. But I would like to see – I believe it is necessary – the Council do even more to allay fears of citizens’ proposals. We also need a Convention to strengthen the heart of democracy. How do you assess the possibility of gaining a majority for this?
[EN] Ilhan | Kyuchyuk said from the Renew that – Madam President, as I promised, I will stick to my two minutes, and Prime Minister, great to be here with you and to discuss Europe’s issues and I want to thank you for your great leadership. Finally you will have the opportunity to speak in front of the full plenary in a couple of minutes and we will hear your final conclusions. The think tank of the Liberals – ‘Overview’ – this month is entitled ‘Facing Permacrisis: to Stay the Same, the EU Needs to Change’. I couldn’t agree more. This impact of the coronavirus, inflation crisis, energy crisis, certainly the war in Ukraine: only those events in the last three years are enough to shake up our perceptions of Europe of tomorrow. Let me start by thanking you on your leadership on migration. You spoke at length about migration. After years of deliberation, compromises, redrafting, we need to make sure that we finally have a place where clear, fair and humane rules of migration are in place for Europe. Building higher walls only provides a false sense of security. Another extremely important and long-awaited segment that finally needs to find resolution is achieving full integration of Europe: a better integrated single market capable to resist the competitive distractions; a strong and completed eurozone; but most importantly, the Schengen Area – we simply cannot continue talking about equality in the Union if we don’t have all the Member States part of the Schengen Area. And third, necessary is to making a full use of the rule of law framework. Lastly, we cannot punish the countries aspiring to join the European Union for our need of reforming its infrastructure. Europe is not complete without having the Balkans, and Europe is not going to be complete without having Ukraine. Together, we can move forward with our friends and partners, with aligning to the European policies and thank you again for taking leadership on many of them.
[EN] Rasmus | Andresen said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President! Prime Minister, in your last speech here in Parliament a few months ago, you reminded us all of our shared European historical heritage. You clearly warned and condemned the normalization and trivialization of fascism in Europe. And indeed, we are currently engaged in a very fundamental debate. In some member states, alliances are forming that include parties with fascist origins or that, oblivious to history, oppose our European democracy. They want a Europe of nations from which only a few benefit and almost everyone loses. They begin with attacks on minorities and the media – as we are currently experiencing in Italy, where rainbow families are discriminated against, absurd nationalist language laws are being introduced, and where freelance journalists are being put under pressure. It must be our common democratic task to stand up against this. That is why it is all the more shocking that conservatives, and unfortunately some liberals as well, are planning alliances with these parties. The firewall against the right must not fall!
[EN] Dominik | Tarczyński said from the ECR that – Madam President, this is a very important debate about the future of Europe. This is a very important debate and I cannot hear the answer for the very fundamental question: what kind of future do you want for Europe? Do you want to build on the foundation of the European history, on Greek philosophers, Roman law, Christian culture, or do you want to continue with your politics, which led us to no-go zones in Sweden, burning suburbs in Paris, terrorist attacks in Germany and Spain? So maybe you should focus on the legacy of John Paul II, Copernicus, Chopin. Maybe you should go back to the roots before we’re going to discuss the future. So maybe you should be like Poland – with the lowest unemployment in European Union. Maybe you would like to be number one as the safest place in Europe. So if you want to have a future for Europe, be like Poland, because Poland is the future.
[EN] Jörg | Meuthen said from the NI that – Madam President! Mr Prime Minister, I respect your speech. That was refreshingly liberal – I was pleased about that. The multitude of crises in the world nevertheless raises questions about how Europe should position itself in terms of foreign policy in the future. The key question is: How must the EU be structured in order to respond successfully to these crises? The knee-jerk response – yours too, Mr Bettel – is always: more EU, more centralism and, at the same time, a blind attitude and a commitment to beliefs, when in fact only realpolitik and pragmatism are called for. If we face the truth, the EU is today an economically sick giant that is constantly losing ground globally, and politically a dwarf that no one takes seriously anymore. Mrs von der Leyen learned this painfully and even embarrassingly two weeks ago in Beijing, and a few days later the German Foreign Minister, who is only laughed at internationally anyway, did the same in the same place. The EU must finally learn to pursue a foreign policy guided by a balance of interests and pragmatic realism. There must be an end to the lecturing, moralizing, and entirely inappropriate European arrogance. Otherwise, the EU will make itself a laughingstock internationally. This is how it should... (The President cuts off the speaker.)
[EN] Benoît | Lutgen said from the PPE that – Madam President, Mr Prime Minister – gudde moien , dear Xavier –, first of all, congratulations, obviously, for following the tradition of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg of defending European values and the European spirit, and of defending minorities, in particular. That being said, Mr Prime Minister, I think it is really essential that you also commit to a strategic autonomy that is not open but firm, solid, in different sectors for Europe: food, energy, defense – three sectors that are essential for the development of the whole of Europe. I did not hear you, Mr Prime Minister – and I am disappointed – I did not hear you talk about agricultural policy, which is essential. How can we succeed with climate change policy without talking about farmers, the men and women who fight every day to feed us? I think it is really important that, beyond the values we defend, we defend every European, that, wherever they are geographically, every European sees Europe as an opportunity, and that we give them all our support wherever they are. This is how we will defend the European Union.
[EN] Alex | Agius Saliba said from the S-D that – Madam President, thank you Prime Minister for being with us today. In order for the European project to remain relevant, we must talk about the priorities of the people. And one of the biggest priorities that people are, and citizens are talking about is the priority of strengthening the social sector on a European basis, in a situation where we have very high inflation rates, high energy and food prices, increasing unemployment, increasing poverty and increasing social inequalities and the war in Ukraine. So it is important that the principles of the European Pillar of Social Rights, the SDGs, continue to be the compass that guides reforms and investments. Social rights should have the same importance as macroeconomic and environmental goals with the common goal of improving the well-being of our European citizens. And so I would also like to ask you what our priorities are and what they should be as Europeans right now, also with regard to the social sector, even though coincidentally we also have a Commissioner responsible for the social sector who is doing a good job, who is also Luxembourgish.
[EN] Carles | Puigdemont i Casamajó said from the NI that – Madam President, Prime Minister, I asked to speak in this debate because I have been waiting for five months for the opportunity to thank you for the speech you gave on the 70th anniversary of the European Parliament. You gave hope to many of us, who are tired of listening to speeches from our European leaders that are so predictable and standardized that they could well have been written by the now-famous ChatGPT. Today, you have emphasized, as you did five months ago, the importance of respecting minorities, whether sexual, ethnic, religious, or political, for peace among the peoples of Europe. I have rarely heard this with the conviction that you have, and that you know how to convey. I ask you to continue to use your voice to remind us, as you said, that neither rights nor peace are definitive achievements and that we must sincerely fight to defend them every day.
[EN] Siegfried | Mureşan said from the PPE that – Madam President, thank you, Prime Minister Bettel, and many thanks to the people of Luxembourg for being excellent hosts to the European Parliament and to many institutions of the European Union for more than 70 years. The people of Luxembourg have always been at the forefront of European integration and at the forefront of defending European values. Let us stick together in defending Europe against extremism, against euroscepticism, against division and against exclusion. Let us fight together for European values, for our democracy, for our institutions, for the values of the free world. And let me say that defending our European way of life requires efforts, and sometimes it also requires costs. Safety, security and defence is something important to my political family, to the European People’s Party, and we have to work on this together. This is why my plea to you, Prime Minister: battle that Luxembourg increases also its commitment to safety, security and to defence spending, as we have all agreed in NATO to allocate 2% of our GDP to defence. The people of Ukraine are fighting for a European way of life. We should also defend our security here in Europe and at our borders.
[EN] Brando | Benifei said from the S-D that Madam President, Mr. President Bettel, welcome back to the European Parliament. Your country, Luxembourg, has been central to the construction of European integration, along with many other countries. Today we are a great Union, but we need more courage, from your country and from many others, from many governments, from the Council. On May 8 and 9, for Europe Day, hundreds, thousands of citizens and associations will be here demonstrating in Strasbourg; they are doing so in every corner of Europe for a more united and federal Europe. It is the new generations who are demanding swift decisions, without vetoes, on the crucial issues of social rights, climate rights, tax justice, civil rights, and institutional change for a stronger Europe. The Conference on the Future of Europe has shown the way forward. Let us open a convention for treaty reform, which will give rise to true European integration, while also respecting differences. Let's not veto the future of European citizens; let's listen to their demands for a more united Europe, because otherwise the alternative is nationalism, and nationalism, as we know well, is war.
[EN] Loucas | Fourlas said from the PPE that – Mr President, I welcome you to the European Parliament. As an MEP from a small country, Cyprus, I greet the leader of another small European country, but with a great contribution to the European process. What unites us in Europe are its principles and values, which we all have to uphold. Coming from a small country, Mr Prime Minister, I want to state emphatically that solidarity is often interpreted for us as ensuring our existence. Unfortunately, I cannot say that we, the small Member States, have received the solidarity or support we deserve. I would like to thank you very much for the principled stance that your country is taking on the Cyprus issue, a problem of invasion and occupation. I also thank you for the stance that your country is taking on the very serious issue of immigration. As a small country, we have been left to struggle on our own, receiving so far only verbal support, without any substantive solutions being provided. Because only with practical and specific actions of support towards small member states can real solidarity and European integration be achieved, as you described it earlier. Otherwise we will simply be talking about a Europe of the few and the powerful, something that I am sure that neither you nor we accept.
[EN] Christophe | Hansen said from the PPE that – Madam President. Prime Minister, it is a pleasure to see you, for the third time in a year, here in this plenary session. I think this is proof of the respect you show our institution. Some have not necessarily shown you the same respect by attacking the policy of Luxembourg, our country, and I regret that, because we are here to also discuss the future of the European Union, and I think that the European recovery plan has been one of the greatest deepenings of our European Union in the 21st century. My first question for you is therefore the following: what would be the next steps for an even greater deepening, and what would be the next deepening that you see? A second question, which is obviously very important in foreign and security policy, concerns the principle of unanimity, which, in my opinion, is counterproductive. What is your position, and what actions would be needed to get rid of this system of unanimity? A third question, finally, in light of what you said about being close to citizens. If we talk to citizens, obviously, we sometimes have a problem with representativeness and democracy, because we had, for example, the Spitzenkandidaten system, which citizens tell us they support. What would your position be next year if we re-discuss the Spitzenkandidat? Do you accept it, Mr Bettel?
[EN] Xavier | Bettel said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Luxembourg. – Madam President, first of all I would like to thank all the speakers for taking the floor and I will allow myself to respond. I do not know if Ms. Aubry is here. Because Ms. Aubry attacked my country. But I remember, I had the same scenario, Madam President, a few years ago, except that it came from the other extreme. It was Ms. Le Pen. Today, Ms. Le Pen is not here, and Ms. Aubry asked me a riddle. I have another one: who is holding the same discourse as Ms. Le Pen, and for four years? It is Ms. Aubry. (Applause) Moreover, Madam President, she is absent when we want to respond. So, I will give her my response in writing. I've had a lot of questions, so let me just say this: regarding tax transparency, Luxembourg ratified the multilateral convention in 2019. In December 2022, we adopted the minimum taxation directive. We are active at the OECD level on Pillar A of international tax reform. Luxembourg is therefore part of the solution to the fight against tax evasion and aggressive tax planning. And we haven't been the problem for years, so it would be important to also update ourselves on all the changes that have been made in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. I've had several questions; I'll start at the end. Mr. Lutgen spoke about agriculture. We must stop thinking that the economy, ecology, and agriculture are three enemies. On the contrary: the economic opportunity is enormous with ecology. Do some people think that ecology, the economy, and agriculture go against each other? We will not succeed in tackling climate change without the economy, just as we will not succeed without agriculture. So, let us see them as partners rather than enemies. We need agriculture that works, and we also know that we can produce differently, and that citizens, consumers, also expect us to pay attention to what is on their plates. Of course, price exists, and it is important for many citizens, but quality is also important, and we cannot say that farmers are at fault, because, if there is one professional category that is suffering from climate change, Madam President, it is farmers. They are the ones who will no longer be able to produce if climate change makes the fields infertile. So, let us also think of them when we talk about climate change. Several colleagues have asked me questions about the changes we want to make regarding the future of Europe. There are many questions, indeed – the four priorities, the four chapters… I think the Commission is also preparing changes at the legislative level, and we must encourage them. If you ask me, I would recommend not changing the treaties now. I'm telling you this personally. Why? Because I know that in a number of states, referendums will be held. And I think that, today, where we can move forward, we must move forward, we must do so. But making changes to the treaties today would be risky. It would risk blocking, in fact, any future developments. So let's sit down around the table, let's see what we can change without changing the treaties and with legislative procedures, in order to move forward. You raised the question of transnational lists and Spitzenkandidaten. I must tell you personally that transnational lists, if we want to make them, must be transnational. It must not be regional, it must be a list, if we want to do it, of 27 candidates from 27 different countries. And, in that case, there will be a Spitzenkandidat, because today we have Spitzenkandidaten who are not candidates anywhere or who are not on everyone's lists. So, if we want to have a Spitzenkandidat at the European level, the parties must agree, there must be a list that is represented in each country with 27 candidates on it, we must have a voice for these European deputies, where we choose who we want to elect, and another transnational European list with 27 candidates, there must be the labels of the different parties that they represent, they must identify themselves and we must elect them. In this case, it's the only thing that can be done, otherwise it's pointless, otherwise we'll just be knitting and tinkering, and I think that won't help. Regarding the meeting between Xi Jinping and Joe Biden, which I requested, I see that currently there are people dying every day in Ukraine, every day. The first thing that would help Ukraine is a ceasefire. It's my deep conviction: a ceasefire is important if we want to stop the bloodshed. And that's why I'm seeing President Putin today - and I know, I've been criticized for it, but I don't regret it. I was in contact with President Zelensky at the beginning and, at President Zelensky's request, I was also in contact with President Putin. And I thought it was important to see if there was a chance of perhaps finding a solution. I gave up when I saw that there was no will on the Russian side to find a peaceful solution to this conflict, especially after what happened in Buchän. For me, the respect, quite simply, was no longer there to be able to work, discuss or try to find a solution together. So today, I see that there is Russia on one side and Ukraine on the other. I am on the Ukrainian side and I am proud that in most political parties, we are aware that, if today we are a democracy on this continent, it is because we had, at the time of the Second World War, other countries that came to defend us. I have a cemetery in Luxembourg that is full of American soldiers, most of whom did not know where my country was. They are the ones who came to defend me from Nazism. And if, at the time, others – Canadians, British, other Americans – had not come, Luxembourg would not be a democracy today. (Applause) We cannot accept that another, larger country decides the future of a neighboring country. We must therefore continue to provide our support, and I think that today the two people who would have the most influence – and this is what I am saying – to bring about a ceasefire are the Chinese president and President Biden. I have said it and I will repeat it. Regarding Romania and Bulgaria, Luxembourg has never opposed their entry into Schengen. Moreover, I will never use national political reasons to block access to Schengen for one or the other. Regarding foreign policy, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg – and this is in our coalition agreement – believes that qualified majority voting could be a solution, and I think it is important to move forward. Madam President, I know that you still have a fairly long agenda. For me, the exchange, the fact of being able to appear before you today, is something important. I am not asking anyone to share my positions, to say that those of one or the other are good. I will tell you, it shocked me, Madam President, to hear someone say here, before this assembly, that their country was an example and that it should be followed. I am proud that the European Union is made up of 27 different countries, different languages, different cultures, different values, different opinions, different religions, different origins, and that we do not have a mold, where we would like everyone to look the same. That would be the end of Europe. I am proud of our diversity.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Prime Minister. The debate is closed. Written declarations (Rule 171)
[EN] Victor | Negrescu said from the S-D that in writing. – Romania's accession to the Schengen area is a right. Our country has been respecting all the technical criteria for over 12 years and any delay in accession means a flagrant and continuous violation of the basic principles of the EU. Therefore, we must stop having political governments in Europe that hold the European Union prisoner. For example, the arguments used by the right-wing government in Austria for the veto applied to Romania have, in fact, no connection with reality or the official data presented by the European Commission. Our country does not bear responsibility for the possible problems in the Schengen area, claimed by the Austrian government, being outside the free movement area. Even today we see the same opposition motivated by false arguments, which does nothing but weaken European unity and sow distrust. These actions, through which the Schengen issue is politicized and the migration issue is instrumentalized, encourage populist rhetoric and create a worrying precedent. Therefore, I appeal for solidarity and insist that the subject of Romania's accession to the Schengen area be on the agenda of both the Justice and Home Affairs Council in June and the European Council, in order to send a strong message of support to the Romanian people, in order to maintain the credibility of the European project.
[EN] Marco | Zanni said from the ID that In writing. – Once again, any opinion that diverges from the mainstream is being labeled as populism, even if based on data and studies rather than empty words. Regarding immigration, I would like to remind the Prime Minister that there is not just one type: what he described in his speech is regular migration, which no one in my party has ever wanted to block. The only type we want to stop is irregular migration, which fuels the business of human trafficking and exploitation, placing capital in the hands of ruthless criminal organizations willing to do anything to make a profit. I would add a consideration regarding the European Union's interference in matters under the exclusive competence of the member states, which I find unacceptable: we united by precisely defining the roles both at the national level and among the various institutions, and now, using blackmail, you essentially want to force member states to adapt their policies to those prevailing in the EU? Immature and ideologically-driven approaches, such as those just described, are the worst way to respond to citizens' needs.
