[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that The next item is the ‘This is Europe’ debate with the Prime Minister of Croatia, Andrej Plenković ( 2022/2709(RSP) ). Dear colleagues, we have the Prime Minister of Croatia, Andrej Plenković with us today. Prime Minister, welcome back to the European Parliament. It is a House that you know so well. We know you as a proud pro-European who, as State Secretary for European integration, laid the groundwork for Croatia’s accession to the European Union in 2013, and as a Member of the European Parliament you worked closely with all of us and also our Ukrainian colleagues. Today, it is under your leadership, as Prime Minister of Croatia, that your country has successfully met all the legal criteria for entry into the euro area. Congratulations! At the start of the year, our House celebrated the euro’s 20th anniversary and it is fitting that Croatia will soon become the 20th member of the eurozone. This marks a true defining moment for Croatia and our Union, but in order to remain credible we must also be consistent. Croatia is ready for Schengen. The European Parliament has long recognised that Croatia has met all the necessary requirements to join the Schengen area and we will continue to support that. Croatia’s European story is a success story. It gives hope. It shows results. With a war on our continent, with the decisions that we must take this week, the importance of hope cannot be underestimated. But hope alone will only get us so far. When countries look to Europe, they expect us to keep our promises and they expect tangible progress, because Europe can be more. On that note I thank you, Prime Minister, dear Andrej, for being a staunch supporter of Europe, for your leadership and for your tireless endeavours to maintain a viable EU perspective for the region. Prime Minister, Andrej, the floor is yours.
[EN] Andrej | Plenković said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Croatia . – Honourable President of the European Parliament – dear Roberta, honourable Vice-Presidents, leaders of political groups, honourable members, I may even say dear friends and dear colleagues, honourable Vice—Presidents of the European Commission – dear Dubravka, dear Maroš, dear citizens of Croatia, dear citizens of the European Union’s Member States, it is my great pleasure to speak in front of you here in the European Parliament already for the third time during my six years as the Prime Minister of Croatia. But also it is my pleasure to be here with you as a friend, as a former colleague that was here between 2013 and 2016. And also, I would like to remember my friend David Sassoli, who was President of the European Parliament and who unfortunately left us too early almost half a year ago. This was a great loss for his family, but also to his home country Italy, and to the entire European Union. Dear friends, when I was speaking last time here in this house of European democracy, I presented at the time – it was January 2020 – the programme of the first ever Croatian Presidency of the Council of the European Union. The title of this programme was ‘A Strong Europe in the World of Challenges’. What unfolded literally two weeks after that speech was the breakout of a COVID—19 pandemic, an event that has entirely altered the way of our lives, the way of our work, of our business, of our transport, of our education. It has literally altered the decision-making process the way we used to know it in the European Union. Croatia’s Presidency couldn’t have guessed better that the world was really facing a challenge, and the challenge was the biggest pandemic in 100 years. The challenge that made us be creative. The challenge that has demonstrated more togetherness among the EU Member States. The challenge that has shown the unprecedented solidarity and the incredible swiftness and efficiency in our common actions to protect our citizens from this plague that has hit the world and that has hit the European Union, that has threatened the lives of our citizens. And in that respect, I think now – looking back at what was done in such a short period of time, not only with epidemiological measures, with the provision of protective equipment, with the incredibly fast discovery of the vaccines – we can say that we saved jobs, that we have kept the existential needs of our families, that we have managed to help our companies, our businesses, especially in the private sector, to bridge the threats that they were facing. In that respect, I as a Prime Minister was conducted by the concept of our policy, which we call the modern approach, the modern take on sovereignty, what it means to a country which became internationally recognised only 30 years ago is important to understand. We were a nation that was seeking its independence, that was seeking its state for many centuries. We finally attained this strategic national objective only 30 years ago in the context of tectonic global changes and the fall of the Berlin Wall and the entire fall of the Communist regimes in Eastern Europe. And for us, attaining our sovereignty was very important. Having our own state was very important. But we have very quickly decided that the future of our nation belongs to the European Union, and everything we have done for two decades after we became internationally recognised – and the day of our international recognition is 15 January – we strived to become a member of the European family and we managed that in 2013. And when I say today my fellow Croats’ ‘modern take on sovereignism’ means that we are achieving our national goals by pooling and sharing our sovereignty with our friends and partners in the European Union, that we are helping our citizens with the extension of the Christian principle of solidarity, something that brings us together, something that helps us to overcome all the difficulties and problems that we would have otherwise overcome in a far more complicated and difficult and most likely slower manner. That’s why this approach that we have for our own country, we are systematically advocating for the entire future of our European Union, because this debate comes in the context of a series of debates on ‘This is Europe’. And I will say a few words about the biggest challenge, the challenge that started on 24 February this year, the brutal Russian invasion and aggression against Ukraine has literally annihilated the main principles of international law, the main approach to global governance, to international relations that we were cultivating for decades. A United Nations member country, a sovereign country, a neighbouring country has suffered a brutal aggression. For Croatia, who was also a victim of aggression of the Greater Serbian policy pursued by Milošević’s regime at the time, at the beginning of the 90s. It was very quick, spontaneous, almost a reflex reaction of first of all understanding what was going on in Ukraine, and second in extending our support and help. The policy of Moscow has two elements. It has two sticks: one stick is the nuclear arsenal, the other stick are the fossil fuels. With these two sticks they were able to conduct such an aggression against Ukraine. At the same time, the two narratives, the narrative of literally not recognising the Ukrainian identity – if you say that you are not Ukrainians, but you are small Russians, then you’re going to the essence of the identity of a nation – and second, the almost incredible narrative of the ‘denazification’ of Ukraine was, in our view, quickly translated into a similar type of narratives that we had in 1990 vis-à-vis the Croats, almost the same when it comes to the identity and when it comes to the so-called denazification. And these parallels were very clear to us. In my speech at the European Council on 24 February I said that this has happened in the moment where obviously the analysis in Moscow was that there were some weaknesses in the context of the timing of the state of play of the West, I will put it in general. The first one was the way of perception that the West left Afghanistan. Perhaps not in the most dignified manner. The second was the fact that there was a change of era in political terms in Germany. Second was that France was preoccupied with the Presidency of the Council and the presidential, and then, of course, which we witnessed recently, parliamentary elections. Third, the United Kingdom left, of its own reasoning, the European family. All this happened immediately, just as in 2008, when there were Olympic Games in Beijing – at the time there were Summer Olympic Games and there was an invasion of Georgia. Now it happened again after the Olympic Games, again in Beijing, the winter Olympic Games; it happened in Ukraine. What were the ramifications? The ramifications for the Ukrainian nation are devastating. Tens of thousands of dead civilians and soldiers, 13 million people displaced, 6 million refugees, incredible material destruction and the occupation of territory. But what we have witnessed was the incredible mobilisation of the international community and support for Ukraine. We did the same. We paid our contribution with a lot of heart in political, in diplomatic, in economic, in financial terms, in humanitarian terms, by hosting the refugees in our country. There are over 20 000 Ukrainians who found shelter in Croatia and we are ready to receive them more. And of course we helped them, just as many other members of the European Union, by providing them means to fight for their freedom, for their independence, for their lives. And that was the procurement of military aid. In that context, Ukraine applied for membership of the European Union. I was one of the members of the European Council who was immediately very clear and articulate about supporting this candidacy, not only because I was the Chair of the Delegation for Relations with Ukraine when I was an MEP here several years ago, but because I know how important this gesture in this context is for the Ukrainian leadership, but most of all for the Ukrainian nation and Ukrainian people, and therefore I am pleased to see that the position of many Member States is now being assembled around the wording that will most likely, at the historic European Council tomorrow and on Friday, actually grant Ukraine candidate status. I think this is important, it’s courageous and it is certainly deserved by a nation that is fighting for the European principles of freedom and of democracy. And therefore our support to Ukraine will remain very clear and unwavering. Similarly, we support the candidate status for Moldova. We support the candidate status for Georgia, with conditions. We feel that this great leap of putting all of those three countries into the context of those states in the European continent who do have a European perspective is an important political evolution on the architecture of our Europe and of our continent. So if this is a debate on Europe, this is a big change on the way that we are looking at countries who are not yet members of the European Union. In this context I will just say that the global perception of the current state of play of international relations is going to be focused on a rather simple notion – and that is not the cooperative way of conducting international relations, but more a conflictual way of international relations – whereby we should, on one side, have democracies and on the other side the authoritarian regimes. This is the gist of the historical moment that we are going through, and this is where the European Union, as one of those who are at the peak of the democratic standards globally, should have a leading role in explaining and doing the so-called political pedagogy wherever we can of what is actually at stake. The ramifications are hitting everyone now of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, in terms of energy crisis, in terms of spike of the prices of the raw materials, construction materials, food, even risking famine, especially in the eastern part of Africa, but elsewhere globally too, and putting inflationary pressures on our own Member States. This is important to understand. No one is untouched by the magnitude of this first of all energy crisis, but even more deeper, by the rise of the prices of food. And here, just as we did in COVID, where we had a huge, unexpected problem, but we provided a very big and efficient answer, and the answer was powerful, The Next Generation EU was a bold European answer of the European Union of today to the problem that was hitting every single one of our citizens. And therefore the attempt which we are now doing with the initiative of the debates of the European Council, the Commission has come up with REPowerEU. It was an important gesture and the guidance of the Commission how we can organise ourselves by being true to the commitment which we said in Versailles we should gradually abandon the fossil fuels coming from Russia. In order to be able to do that and still be able to organise a secure supply of energy to our economies and to our households, we need to organise ourselves in terms of energy grids in the European Union, and that means investments in gas pipelines, in oil pipelines, in liquefied natural gas terminals. Croatia did its part of the homework already before: we have one LNG terminal on the island of Krk with a capacity of 2.9 billion cubic metres now. We decided to invest in it to upgrade it to 6.1 billion cubic metres, which would be enough not only for our needs in terms of our economy and our citizens and our industry, of course, but also for the needs of our neighbouring states such as Slovenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Hungary. Similarly, we use in the same way the Croatian Adriatic pipeline, which can provide enough oil for Hungary, for Slovakia, for Serbia; a pipeline that can easily provide enough for all the refineries in our neighbourhood. That means that our geostrategic position is that we are one of the energy hubs – and the energy map of Europe is something we shall try to foster and strengthen in the years which are ahead of us. Talking about the debate on This is Europe and our debate in the European Council tomorrow and on Friday, and especially the summit that is organised tomorrow morning with the Western Balkans, I will mention here to again the countries that are close to us, which we know well, where we are supporting their path towards the European Union, their European perspective, especially Bosnia and Herzegovina, with whom we share more than 1 000 kilometres of border, where Croats – people who are the same as Croats in Croatia – are one of the three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina with which we have tremendous economic exchange. We are the second investor in Bosnia and Herzegovina and there are so many linkages – historic cultural, economic, transport – that bind us together. And we of course have been in favour of granting candidate status also to Bosnia and Herzegovina, very clearly because we feel that this country should not be the last wagon in the train of the Western Balkans towards the European Union. It would be a historical injustice, and therefore we are one of those Member States who are advocating granting a candidate status also to Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which context we would like also the urgent solution for the changes to the electoral law, which would enable that we have fair and just elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina where all the three constituent peoples, and especially Croats, are after the elections are represented as duly as they should be, as it was the letter and the spirit of the Dayton Peace Agreement, whose Annex IV is the constitution of the country. And this position is very clear. It’s a friendly position. It’s a good neighbourly position. It’s a position that will help the European future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Croatia will be the one who will be the first one to support it wholeheartedly and continuously. When it comes to the future of Europe and the debate after the Conference on the Future of Europe, I would here like to thank Dubravka Šuica, who is a Croatian member of the European Commission and the Vice—President for demography and democracy, and I think that she has done a great job, that the European Parliament has done a great job, that national parliaments have participated in this all-encompassing and inclusive process in bringing the European citizens closer to the European institutions, but more essentially to the gist of the debate of what we can do better together and how we can fill, perhaps, those voids in our cooperation, or how we can rectify some elements that should be done better. From that respect, I think that the Conference on the Future of Europe, especially its conclusions with the suggestions and the recommendations, are a very clear signal of the European peoples, of European citizens from all of our Member States – in Croatia we had more than 250 events – on what the European institutions should do, what would be our direction. I was in particular pleased that there was a very, very clear signal that we should do more in terms of mixed shared competences when it comes to health cooperation. If there was one lesson learned from the pandemic, and we were in the driving seat, we had the presidency, our ambassador here, our permanent representative, triggered the mechanisms at the beginning, already at the end of January in 2020, and then we realised that actually this was an area where the European Union Member States should have more structured cooperation, more shared competences, more competences for the Commission to lead the processes which were done in the crisis management in such an efficient way as if everything was planned, and it wasn’t. So I think that this message that came from the recommendations should certainly be taken into account. When it comes to this critical debate on the decision-making process, when it comes to the issues of foreign and security policy, I understand and fully can have a good comprehension of what the position of the European Parliament is, and I’ve read the resolution. Here, when you sit in the position of a Member of the European Parliament – and I’m lucky to have this experience – and when you sit in your position as a head of government, the optic is a little bit different. There are perhaps 97, 98, 99% of the situations where we find a compromise and agreement almost on everything. Occasionally there are situations where we differ, and we have sometimes difficulties in finding the understanding of other partners for the particular position we have. I’m always saying that conditioning or blackmailing is a very bad policy. We were a victim of blackmailing for several years before we became member and we don’t like it and we don’t support it. Then we always advocate how to use the right argument with the right approach to our friends, to our partners – we are all part of the same family – on how we can reach a compromise. And I have noted that many of the Member States, let’s say small and medium-sized Member States, are a little bit reticent because they know what the mathematics and calculation of the voting in the Council means. And therefore I think that this issue merits a very careful and diligent follow—up. And we shall enter into this debate. We shall take duly into account the messages that were clearly sent to us by the European Conference and by the resolution of the European Parliament. May I say a few words about the Croatia’s ambitions in this almost exactly ninth year of our membership – the end of the ninth year of our membership – because I think it’s important to mention it as well. I conduct as a prime minister a very pro-European policy, taking into account the national interest of my country, just as everybody else is doing and should do. And we decided in our programme six years ago that we want to be part of two deeper integrations: first the eurozone, and second the Schengen Area. And I was very pleased that Roberta has mentioned that Croatia’s membership of the eurozone seems to be set. I would like to thank your colleague Siegfried Mureşan, who is the rapporteur for Croatian membership of the eurozone. After a visit to Croatia he made a very sober, correct, but also positively toned report that the relevant European Parliament committee has overwhelmingly supported, and I’m sure the same happens in the plenary. And that gesture of the European Parliament is highly appreciated in Croatia, by my government, by our citizens. And that means that after the endorsement tomorrow and the European Council, we are facing the final decision at the Ecofin Council on 12 July. That means that Croatia will join the eurozone on 1 January 2023, just as we planned, and just as we have carefully and diligently implemented our strategy for joining the euro, the programme for the conversion of the Croatian kuna to euro, the action plan that followed after our joining of the exchange rate mechanism and the banking union on 10 July 2020, five days after the second victory at the parliamentary elections that we had, and that we shall fulfil this key political, first of all, but also economic and financial objective on time and as we planned. And I thank you for your support and your understanding that Croatia becomes the 20th member of the eurozone. At the same time, I think already next week, the Council will send the formal proposal for the decision to be taken on the Croatia’s membership of the Schengen Area also to the European Parliament, where I expect we will quickly have a rapporteur for Schengen who will also take a very diligent view on our readiness, and we have also worked very, very hard to fulfil these criteria where both Juncker’s Commission at the end of their mandate in October 2019 and again the Commission of Ursula von der Leyen – and I would like to thank in particular her and Commissioner Ylva Johansson – have estimated that Croatia has fulfilled the necessary criteria, and the relevant decision of the Council, after the opinion of the European Parliament, will be taken in autumn, and that we should also join this deeper integration on 1 January 2023. That would mean that Croatia will be with both feet firmly in the centre of the European Union, firmly in the deeper integration, thus fulfilling the decision of the Croatian Parliament and of the Croatian people, and the referendum where we joined the European Union. In that respect, we shall strengthen our economy. We shall strengthen the free movement. We shall facilitate the free movement of people. And it will be a back-up to a situation which we have today. We have the lowest number of unemployed people in Croatia in the last 30 years, only 103 000. We have the biggest employment in Croatia in the last 20 years, and we shall try to continue intervening, as I said many times, whether it was COVID or now the energy crisis, to keep the economic and social standard of our citizens, because this is clearly a key priority, which we will make sure happens because of synergy of using the European and Croatian sources. The membership of the European Union has proven itself in times of crisis as one of those essential tools how we can fulfil the key national objectives and provide shelter and security for our citizens. In that respect, I will mention one important project also co-financed by the European Union budget means, and that is the Pelješac Bridge, the bridge that will be opened on 26 July this year that will physically connect the southern part of Croatia with the rest of the country. For us, it is a strategic objective that could not have had more symbolic connotations than it has, and that we should be continuing to invest in the new security threats, into our defence capabilities and into the contribution of Croatia to the strategic autonomy of the European Union. Croatia will procure 12 French Rafale multi-combat planes that will arrive in a little bit more than a year’s time, and that will strengthen our role as a partner in the European Union’s defence, but also as a reliable ally in NATO. All of this brings me to a conclusion that the times are full of challenges, just as much as we thought when we were preparing our Presidency programme two and a half years ago. But even more when I look at the health crises, security crises, political crises, but also energy and existential crises for many of our citizens who without the role of the state, and without the concerted action, joint action through the principle of solidarity of the European Union, would not look for a better future as we can look at it today. Thank you very much.
[EN] Manfred | Weber said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group . – Madam President, Vice-Presidents Šuica and Šefčovič, dear Prime Minister, dear Andrej, welcome back to the European Parliament, as a former colleague. It’s great to have you here. A second term now as Prime Minister is a strong mandate from your citizens. You are leading Croatia and you are also leading the European debate. When I have in mind that Croatia is the youngest member inside of the European Union today, it is impressive to see the European success story behind it. When I look for the arguments for this success story, what first comes to my mind is the dramatically reduced youth unemployment – to give the young generation a perspective, to reduce the demographic brain drain and all the negative developments over the last decades. You mentioned already, and also Roberta mentioned, two other success stories, with now joining the eurozone, a big success. I want to underline, it’s not only for Croatia, it’s also for Europe, for the eurozone, a big success because it’s proof that it makes sense to do it together. It strengthens the authority of the euro in the world. Also now with the Schengen enlargement, you have the full support of your political group and I think also from the European Parliament, because you managed to do the necessary steps. When we talk about the future of Europe, Croatia is there in a leading role. I also want to thank Dubravka Šuica for her service, for her work on the Conference on the Future of Europe. You also referred to the history of Croatia – and whenever I speak about the general approach, Croatians towards the euro, one event comes to my mind: when I was for the first time as a young MEP in Dubrovnik, in Dubravka’s city, and we visited there the Memorial Centre showing the pictures of the soldiers who died fighting, defending freedom, defending the country, but also freedom and democracy and the rule of law. I saw the pictures, I saw then the subtitles about the names and about the age of the people and of the soldiers that died. Then I read 1971, 1972, and that is my birth year as well. I grew up in Bavaria in a peaceful time and I always had and still have a lot of respect for those who fought for democracy in Croatia. Croatia is, in a way, a good proof for what we have to do today. You said it. Because now it’s a similar situation to Ukraine and Moldova, for those who now stand up and fight for our values, to give them a similar perspective: that enlargement works, that we should be convinced about this model and this approach. This is also true towards the Western Balkans, where we need now a clear timeline. I want to thank the opposition in Bulgaria today, because Boyko Borisov and GERB voted in favour of North Macedonia, to give them a perspective. I also want to express towards the Serbian friends that they have to decide whether they want to join the European Union or whether they are on the side of Russia. There is no in—between anymore. We are making enlargement possible and we have to improve Europe. There you mentioned one aspect, when we speak about the unanimous vote, where we have probably different points of views. Croatia is now joining the eurozone. That means to give up sovereignty because you have no national currency anymore. But the idea behind it is to be stronger together, to be stronger together when we vote by majority. The same is for foreign affairs. We have no China policy currently as a European Union; this gives us clear proof that we are not capable to answer the big challenges, due to the decision—making mechanism. So that’s why, you can imagine, we would be happy if you also would show up in the Council to present the idea of a Convention, because we need a deepening of the European Union to make Europe better, stronger for the future and Croatia will contribute to this. Thank you so much, dear Andrej, and welcome.
[EN] Biljana | Borzan said from the S-D that on behalf of the S&D Group. – Dear President, dear colleagues, dear Prime Minister, in every crisis, the poorest and most vulnerable suffer the most. And while some are thinking about how to put food on the table or pay their bills, others are getting rich. Energy dependence and disruptions in production have resulted in rising prices, but some have gone sky-high simply because of greed. Taxing windfall profits, quality price control, fighting growing inequalities by redistributing resources, and creating a fairer market should all be in our interests. However, this will not happen by itself. You, as Prime Minister and your colleagues, have a responsibility to protect our citizens. I keep repeating this, but perhaps you hear it better in Brussels. Finally, I would like to say that joining the eurozone is positive. However, the euro is not a goal, but a means that should enable our people to have a better life. Our European path continues towards Schengen, but for now it stops at the Slovenian border. Like our citizens, I hope that we will achieve this goal as soon as possible.
[EN] Klemen | Grošelj said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew Group. – Madam Chair, esteemed Prime Minister, greetings also on behalf of Renew Europe and allow me to highlight some questions and dilemmas on which I would like to hear your opinion. We are pleased that Croatia will enter the euro area and see this as a great opportunity for both Croatia and the entire European Union. However, I am interested in what the Croatian government will do to prevent the misuse of the introduction of the euro for unjustified price increases in these times of price pressure, as this affects the image of the European Union in the eyes of the population. Let me once again emphasize the full support of our political group for European aid in the reconstruction of the earthquake-affected areas, where we expect faster and more efficient action by both state authorities and all those involved in the reconstruction. However, let me also emphasize our strong expectation that the Croatian government will prevent the misuse of European funds, such as we have witnessed in the past. I will not open the issue of borders in the region, but allow me to emphasize that in the spirit of the principle of the rule of law, on which the European Union is founded and falls, it is expected that the decisions of courts, including arbitration courts, will be respected and implemented regardless of any different political positions. Given the current issue of migration in the European Union, I would like to hear your opinion and views on the European Migration Pact and in particular your position on whether Croatia, even in the light of reports of "pushbacks" and deaths at the borders, including drownings in the Kolpa River, will respect and also implement in cooperation with all its neighbors the highest standards of international European law and at the same time effectively protect the external borders of the European Union. I believe that it is in our common interest that Schengen works, that it is not only a common area of ​​free movement of people and goods, but also a space of common and uniform legal norms. And finally, I cannot help but feel, despite your words today, that Croatia remains in some way a hostage of its own policy towards Bosnia and Herzegovina, which unfortunately remains entangled in the support of narrow-minded and misguided nationalist policies. Here are policies that, on the one hand, prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina from becoming a European country, and on the other hand, harm both the Republic of Croatia and the Croatian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a peculiar paradox that, despite all its complexity, can only be resolved by a clear and firm path for Bosnia and Herzegovina to full membership in the European Union. Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of the European Union is in the interest not only of the European Union, but above all of Croatia and the Croatian people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Allow me, due to the importance of the tourist season, to wish Croatia a successful tourist season, and as few setbacks as possible for us visitors on this path.
[EN] Philippe | Lamberts said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Greens/EFA Group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, on behalf of the Green Group, welcome here to the European Parliament. Last Sunday, I was debating with Pyotr Tolstoy, the Vice-President of the Duma, the Russian Parliament. He told me that he didn't care if Ukraine became a candidate for membership of the European Union, because if all goes well, within a year, Ukraine would no longer exist. He put it like that! He was calling for a new Yalta in Europe. In other words, we had from the Russian authorities, and you rightly denounced this, the reaffirmation of the Brezhnev doctrine, that of unlimited sovereignty. In other words, there are states, the superpowers, which can be sovereign and the others only have to submit to the will of these great powers. This is what we call, in other words, imperialism. Nothing could be further from this concept than this idea, which you rightly highlighted, of shared sovereignty. A freely shared sovereignty. And I would like to tell you how much it touched me to see, after the dismemberment of the former Yugoslavia and the nationalism that was expressed during the war, as you rightly said, Croatia choose. Choose for its European vocation, choose to renounce... I wouldn't say renounce, but to share its newly acquired sovereignty with some thirty other states, here in Europe. And the fact of seeing Croatia join the euro, join Schengen, continues to delight me. I was a Member of the European Parliament when your country became a member and I remain absolutely convinced today that the European Union is the governance of the future. I would like to say to you, perhaps because it is up to friends to express their respective concerns, two points, two worries that I have with regard to what is happening in your country – I obviously dream that all Member States will be exemplary in every respect. There are two subjects that I would like to raise. The first is the way in which European funds are allocated in your country. It occurs to me that too often, European money is allocated on a first-come, first-served basis, rather than on the merits of the projects that are submitted. However, the value of the European budget, the value of European projects, is precisely to be able to do things together that each of us is incapable of doing alone. Regarding these projects, you will obviously not be surprised that a Green reminds you of the challenge of the ecological transition to respect the biophysical limits of the planet. Croatia is also at the forefront of climate change, but also has enormous potential in terms of renewable energies. And so, I would so much like Croatia to be a pioneer in this transition. Second point of concern: you spoke about accession to the Schengen area. You know, because I told you when we came to Zagreb for the opening of the Croatian presidency, that we continue to receive substantiated messages that there continue to be violent pushbacks at the country's borders. You promised us at the time that all this would be investigated and that it would stop if illegal things were happening, but we continue to receive these messages and therefore our concern remains. Yes, absolutely, Croatia has its place in Schengen, but not at the cost of contributing, in some way, to making Europe a fortress. I would like to end, Mr. Prime Minister, on a slightly more personal note. For more than 30 years, I have had the joy of having a brother-in-law of Croatian origin. He is in the stands as we speak. His father, originally from Varaždin, arrived in Belgium in the 1960s, was a construction worker, but he always had a passion for writing. One of his many works describes at a human level the reality of life in Yugoslavia in the 20th century. He describes his visceral attachment to his ancestral land, where he returned to live out the last chapter of his life, to its customs, its religion, and family values. So, I know the esteem he has for you and I know that he will be proud that you receive this work from my hands.
[EN] Gunnar | Beck said from the ID that on behalf of the ID Group . – Madam President, I am not going to speak for two, or two and a half, additional minutes, but maybe a few seconds more. I’m counting on your indulgence. Madam President! Prime Minister Plenković, congratulations on joining the euro! But the eurozone has had hardly any zero or negative growth for years. In high technology and growth industries, we are hopelessly behind China and the USA. Inflation is rampant and is at 9%; in Switzerland it is under 3%. The euro cost German savers alone around 160 billion euros in 2021 - unaffordable, economically disastrous and, in the long term, contrary to the treaty, because the euro rescue has been carried out for years in open contradiction to Articles 123 TFEU, 125 TFEU, 127 TFEU and 310 and 311 TFEU. Thomas More, well known to all Catholics and thus also to your countrymen, once rebuked his perjured adversary Cromwell with the words: "An individual may be tempted to give his salvation for the whole world, but for Wales?" Now you are giving up your country for the euro. Actually, only countries that have long since written themselves off should do so. I hope that is not the case for your country.
[EN] Eugen | Jurzyca said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR Group. – Madam President, Croatia will become the twentieth member of the eurozone next year, and this is an opportunity not only to wish Croatia success, but also to say a few words about the eurozone, which was intended as a club of countries with low debt, sound public finances, and sharing a stable currency. However, with the advent of the financial crisis, this paradigm has changed to a large extent. The ECB's purchases of government bonds are turning the eurozone into a transfer union. Fiscal rules are regularly violated, and they were actually de facto abolished with the advent of the pandemic. Public debts have increased, inflation is reaching record highs. Perhaps these are also the reasons why correct academic research suggests that several new and older members of the eurozone would have higher economic performance today if they had kept their own currencies. And I say this as a supporter of Slovakia, my country, joining the eurozone. I wish Croatia and the eurozone that its membership in it will be a success story for both parties.
[EN] Cornelia | Ernst said from the The Left that on behalf of the Left group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, let us talk about Europe, because there is a lot that needs to change, and we must talk about it. We need an EU that opens up, and that means – and this is my position – first of all bringing all the countries of the former Yugoslavia into the EU on equal terms, as full members. It is time to do this. We need an EU that doesn’t just supposedly let the big players call the shots, but above all gives its citizens more of a say, and an EU – you have already mentioned this – that combats poverty. We are talking about food prices, energy prices and a great deal else besides; more must be done in this regard. And – and I say this too: without freedom and democracy, nothing is nothing in this Europe. It starts with ensuring that in all member states – including yours and mine, and I say this quite openly – women are granted the right to self-determination over their bodies, and in this case abortion is accepted and not sabotaged. It is such a simple matter that we still do not have under control. And it continues with the fact that human rights must finally be respected at the EU's external borders. I have been to your country very often, very often. And I tell you, it is unbearable how refugees are treated there – I cannot bear to see it – who are really pushed back every day, over and over again. How does that fit with your positive statement about welcoming Ukrainian refugees with open arms – which I consider very, very important? It does not fit. I cannot explain to the Afghan soldier on the Bosnian-Croatian border, who has fought the Taliban for years, why he is not allowed into the EU, or to the Nigerian Christian who is persecuted in her country. We must change that. This pigeonholing, this double standard, must end. And because that's the case, I'm handing you the work of many NGOs: It's a Black Book about pushbacks and many other things. It's not just about Croatia; it's about many European countries. Please, let's talk about these issues and make real changes!
[EN] Ivan Vilibor | Sinčić said from the NI that – Dear President, Dear Mr. Plenković, the recession in Croatia has reached its highest level. That is fine. This is the policy that you are pursuing with your legally condemned organization, quite legitimately because the citizens of our Croatia chose it. The majority of parties in our Croatian Parliament raised their hands in favor of sanctions against Russia. So, you had the support of your party and the opposition parties in the Croatian Parliament. Therefore, the recession that has befallen us cannot be blamed on you. Out of 195 countries in the world, only 45 have imposed sanctions on Russia, and all of them are suffering the consequences, but that is the will of the citizens and there is nothing to complain about. However, I do not deal only with short-term politics, but with long-term politics. I investigate corruption, collect, listen to citizens, report, build a network into which your corrupt members and closest associates fall one after another. Today, you may have some support from the people, Croatian citizens, who are being selective in their information and who do not know the real and whole truth, but the one that you and your protectors want to present. But let's not forget, Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov had the support of state institutions and the media. The trials against him dragged on for 13 years, and Brussels unfortunately had his back. And then the Bulgarian people saw the light, they took to the streets in 2020. The protests in Sofia lasted for months. Outraged Bulgarian citizens stopped me on the streets of Brussels and begged me for help. Come to Sofia. Why does the EU tolerate so much corruption in Bulgaria? I was a speaker at those Bulgarian protests and made my contribution to the fight against crime. In the end, Mr. Borisov also fell from power. Brussels turned its back on him and today he is in prison. It is time, Mr. Plenković, for you to ask yourself who is laughing last, Mr. Plenković.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Prime Minister, I now give you the floor to respond to the questions, the comments, the gifts, the attributions, the books that you have received.
[EN] Andrej | Plenković said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Croatia . – Madam President, thank you very much. How much time do I have? Five minutes – okay. I will try then to be very precise!
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Everybody has sort of gone over their time already! You should be fine.
[EN] Andrej | Plenković said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Croatia . – Madam President, thank you very much to the President of the European People’s Party and the EPP Group in the Parliament, Manfred Weber, for the positive comments about Croatia’s advancement and especially the fulfilment of the criteria for joining the eurozone. When it comes to the follow-up on the Conference on the Future of Europe, we shall certainly debate it within the Council. As I told you, having been in the European Parliament, I can completely understand the position of the European Parliament and I will certainly give a constructive contribution of Croatia to what we can do to improve our decision-making. And as I said, in terms of foreign policy, we basically agree on 97, 98, perhaps 99% of issues, and there are a small margin of those dossiers where we need more consultation and perhaps more time to forge a compromise. To Ms Borzan on energy, it’s good that you mentioned it, now I can repeat that we have provided an HRK 5 billion package to subsidise our households, to subsidise our micro-, small and medium-sized business, to subsidise our farmers, to subsidise our fishermen, to subsidise our pensioners, to lower the VAT from 25 to 5% from 13 to 5 for all those products which are mostly used by our citizens and thus mitigate the effects of the spike of the prices. And we shall continue to do that again. And not only the government, the state inspectorate, but also the watchdogs in terms of consumer protection should play their role and strongly blacklist those who are trying to profit in this crisis and unduly and unjustifiably raise the prices of their products. When it comes to Mr Grošelj, thank you for the support for the euro. When it comes to the EU funds and to the aid of the European Union through the EU solidarity fund for earthquakes, I’m grateful here for the Commission who has helped us to not only receive for two terrible earthquakes in Zagreb and the Banovina region almost EUR 1 billion, we are streamlining the efforts of all the ministries in order to speed up the process of reconstruction and also, on the general comments on the use of funds, we are using them in the best practices that exist in the European Union with all the scrutiny and the controls that are required. On the rule of law and pacta sunt servanda , generally, yes, absolutely, but at the same time, you are aware, coming from Slovenia, that the unfortunate arbitration process on the border dispute fell and was inevitably and irretrievably lost and denounced by the Croatian Parliament because of the fraudulent activities that were happening between the Slovenian agent and the Slovenian member of the Arbitration Council. So we want to solve the bilateral border issue, but not on the basis of the process which could not have been cleansed as if it was the mistake of a first grader at school by making a typing error on the alphabet. When it comes to the migration pact, we of course support it, it is part of our approach to Schengen. Schengen needs to be renovated, upgraded and updated, but Croatia should be within Schengen. When it comes to your comment on Bosnia and Herzegovina national politics – nationalistic politics – please bear in mind Bosnia and Herzegovina applied for membership of the European Union in February of 2016, when Dragan Čović, – the leader of perhaps in your eyes a nationalist party which is Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina, our sister party – was chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This démarche of filing an application was more supported by the Members of this House – Croatian Members of the European Parliament, both from HDZ but also from Social Democrats and some other friends such as at the time Romanian rapporteur Preda – than many Member States of the European Union. And we were the first one to support the European Union membership path of Bosnia and Herzegovina and we shall continue to do so and continue to extend the knowledge and understanding of the country that is based on the concept of one state, two entities and three constituent peoples which should be equal. None of the constituent peoples, in this case Croats, in the territory or federation should not be treated as not equal. This is the only basic, simple, normal, decent demand and we will stick to it. The other issue that Mr Lamberts mentioned, when it comes to the choice of Croatia for being part of the European Union, I think we had this debate when you visited Croatia two and a half years ago, I really enjoyed it and I think you understood that we are doing this of our own choice, of our own free will. We shall continue to do it. Pooling and sharing of sovereignty is something we support. We think we are stronger in the European Union than we would have been if we were not. And therefore, the full understanding of the concept of European integration is something that we fully support. On Schengen and the fact that Croatian police – more than 6 000 members of the Croatian police – is protecting Croatia’s external border, is a job which is very difficult to do, a job where they have the total scrutiny of the entire Ministry of the Interior. Every single complaint is being checked and verified. We have established an entirely independent monitoring mechanism out of our own will in cooperation with the European Commission. I think that the report of the independent monitoring mechanism will be out sometime next week. In the process of scrutiny in the European Parliament when the opinion on Croatia’s membership of Schengen will be done, we will be open to explain and to provide arguments on any potential allegations, if there are some, and we shall provide answers. But generally the Schengen acquis , we are ready. The legal standards we are ready. The protection of the border, we are completely ready. Plus, we are the country that never made a political decision to elevate walls, no fences, no barbed wires, not with Serbia, not with Bosnia and Herzegovina, not with Montenegro. These are our friends and neighbours, with whom we should not have physical barriers. And this is something that we can only protect by the presence of Croatian police along more than 1 300 kilometres of our external border. To Mr Beck and Mr Jurzyca, two points: Croatia is a highly euro-ised economy. Our savings, our loans are basically more than 50-60% in euros. Some 70% of tourists that visit Croatia come from the eurozone. Our trade is with the eurozone. This was the logical choice, logical follow-up of our accession treaty. We are basically abrogating the derogation and this is the work that has been done diligently, fulfilling all the criteria with the action plan and clear opinions of the Commission and of the ECB actually give us argument to continue to do that. For our economy the euro will bring benefits and it will not be a negative circumstance. When it comes to Schengen, I think I have answered Ms Ernst. I will look at what you have given me. When it comes to Mr Sinčić, I think that it’s no surprise to the Croatian public that you come here and advocate basically the Russian position. This is very clear. You will belong to one of those political actors who is strongly supported by the Russian actors. You did this in the Croatian Parliament. You are doing this now in the European Parliament. It’s your right, but also your responsibility. When it comes to the fight against corruption, I said at the beginning of my mandate six years ago, no one is immune to the independent work of our judicial institutions, our state prosecutor, our special prosecutor for corruption and organised crime, our police, they do their work independently. Those who will, in the legal process, be declared as responsible for something, they will be condemned, or if they are not, they will be free, just as in any other country in Europe. Corruption is a negative phenomenon, but is not a phenomenon that is only applicable to Croatia. It is unfortunately a phenomenon that exists for many years and we are fighting it strongly with the means, with the changing of the laws, with the action plans, and with concrete cases. And those who know Croatia better certainly know that there is no government influence whatsoever on the work of the prosecutor or our judiciary or the police. And it will remain in such a manner because at the end of the day, when we joined the European Union in 2013 and you of course didn’t contribute one millimetre for Croatia becoming a member of the European Union, I did, members of my party did – unlike you and perhaps yours, so this is a huge difference between the two of us. We have been Europeans from the first day. You have joined the train and you are enjoying the benefits of being an MEP, even though you obviously do not believe in the European Union and haven’t contributed to Croatia’s European journey at all. But that is democracy. I respect it. And I was very happy to be here with you today.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you very much Prime Minister. This debate is now closed and we will move on to the next debate with my colleague Rainer Wieland.
