[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Dear colleagues, we have the President of Romania, Klaus Iohannis, with us today. Dear President, dear Klaus, welcome to the European Parliament. Thank you for accepting our invitation to address this House as part of our ‘This is Europe’ series of debates. Seventeen years of European Union membership have been transformative for Romania and for Europe. It has given new impetus for businesses, for industry, for science and academia. It has brought reforms and social benefits. It has brought opportunities for people and levelled up communities. EU membership has meant protection for people’s rights, for social justice and the rule of law. And in times of geo-political change, these European values must be defended. Dear President, I would like to particularly thank you for your country’s unwavering support for Ukraine and for the Republic of Moldova – particularly now that EU accession negotiations have begun. Thank you to Romania for always being the champion the people of those nations needed. Romania has a special place in my heart. It is a country that has embraced what it means to be European. At the height of the pandemic, Romanian doctors flew to hospitals in other Member States to help. When we faced devastating natural disasters, Romanian firefighters left their country to run into the flames. In the first days of the brutal Russian invasion of Ukraine, Romanian families rushed to the border to comfort those fleeing. Mulțumesc pentru tot România! Mr President, yours is a country that has shown how to overcome challenges and how to lead. Europe is stronger thanks to Romania, thanks to your reinforcement of the EU’s eastern flank. And we will be stronger still when you finally take your rightful place in the Schengen area, and join the eurozone in the future. And you will find this House on your side on that journey. (Applause) Last word: on 9 June, over 19 million Romanians will be called upon to choose the 33 Members of the European Parliament elected to represent them. We must work together to make sure people understand why they must vote, why it is important. Their voice matters for the European Union and Romania’s future, and we must keep listening and keep delivering. Dear President, Dear Klaus, the floor is yours.
[EN] Klaus | Iohannis said from the NULL that President of Romania . – Madam President of the European Parliament, distinguished Members of the European Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, it is an honour for me to be before you today. Thank you, Madam President Metsola, for giving me the opportunity to return to the heart of European democracy at the beginning of a crucial year for the future of the European Union. As five years ago, when I addressed the plenary of the European Parliament, I want to reaffirm my confidence and that of the Romanian people in the value of united and solidary European action, in the undeniable power of a single Europe. The effects of the pandemic, Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine, the conflict in the Middle East, all these are just some of the dramatic developments that have tested in recent years not only our capacity to respond, but also our sincere attachment to the Union and to the values ​​and principles that hold us together. Ladies and gentlemen, my country is probably one of the best examples of the transformative power of the European Union. Accession has brought us indisputable and most concrete benefits. The European funds that have entered Romania since accession have allowed us to carry out essential infrastructure projects. Over 600,000 young Romanians have participated in the Erasmus program, thus adopting the European way of life. The Union means an area of ​​security, protection, prosperity and diversity. The European Union remains par excellence an area of ​​free movement. The lifting of controls at air and sea borders in March must naturally be followed, as soon as possible, by the elimination of controls at land borders. Only in this way will we have a correct and concrete reflection of the contribution that Romania makes to strengthening the security of the entire European Union. Ladies and gentlemen, the European project requires attention, effort, patience and honesty every day, if we want to live freely in a united and prosperous Europe. Today's Romania is a strong promoter of coordinated action in the spirit of European values. We have a responsibility to support a Europe that takes these principles and values ​​further, including towards our friends in the European neighbourhood who have chosen our model of democracy and development, and the European elections are a key stage in this process. The priorities that we will define together after these elections should help us respond pragmatically to the challenges of the present and better prepare us for the challenges of the future. Distinguished Members of the European Parliament, our Union faces unprecedented geostrategic challenges. Our future and the future of the next generations depend on each and every decision we are taking now. On a global level, the rules-based international order is being challenged over and over again. Russia pursues its aggression against Ukraine. Around the Union, instability and insecurity have reached alarming levels. The open conflict in the Middle East, the situation in the Red sea and the worrying developments in the Sahel: all these have a systemic impact on our own security. Climate change, economic difficulties and illegal migration continue to generate their own negative impact, adding to the complexity of global dynamics. On top of all these challenges, we witness a crisis of values. And, as far as I see it, a crisis of public trust in our institutions. We are indeed facing an erosion of values ​​within the European Union, which fuels the perception of the decline of Europe, or at least of Europe's leadership and global role. This is why we need to do more, to promote the feeling and the certainty that we are all part of the same community of values, which must be protected by every single one of us. Honorable Members of the European Parliament, at such a pivotal moment fundamental questions lie ahead of us. We must answer them together as Europeans with vision, courage and responsibility. First, what can we do and have to do as a Union? The current challenges are pushing us towards a transformative rethinking of our actions. The past few years proved that our common action as one, as a true Union, is key. Our unity has been repeatedly tested and has not faltered. More than this, it was a strategic surprise for some and brought us tactical advantages. We should build upon this. Second, thinking further, another crucial question emerges. What can we do more, internally? Strengthening our internal resilience is a fundamental condition for a stronger Union and for its increased geopolitical role. This is perhaps the most complex discussion. It includes finding the best strategies to respond to hybrid threats and to increase the functionality of our democratic systems. It means developing sectoral policies such as technology, including artificial intelligence, fighting climate change, stimulating competitiveness, industrial production, and sustainable supply chains. I do believe that the success of the démarches in these areas depends on a strong single market, which can provide solutions to many of the problems we face, encouraging creativity and large-scale development. We as a Union are now taking unprecedented steps to move away from a reactive approach in consolidating our internal resilience. We are taking action in terms of strengthening our internal capabilities such as infrastructure, green and digital transitions, civil crisis response, energy efficiency and supply chains. Another obvious line of action is to continue to support Ukraine. We must stand by Ukraine and its people. I have this conviction, despite certain voices invoking a European solidarity fatigue. Defending democracy, territorial integrity and sovereignty, as well as the rules-based international order, cannot be subject to any fatigue. Romania remains engaged in this common effort. We are strongly involved in supporting Ukraine as well as the Republic of Moldova, which is intensely affected by the crisis in the region. We also need to keep our focus on security. We are now moving towards a joint long-term planning and increased convergence in the field of European security and defence, while working in full complementarity with NATO. It is indeed high time to deliver on our European ambitions when it comes to our defense industry. Esteemed Members of the European Parliament, I wish to express my appreciation for the strong attachment to values ​​that this House has always shown, but we must be aware of the growing Euroscepticism. Its followers may raise issues that are in some part real, but they give wrong and dangerous solutions that would throw our societies into crisis. It is therefore, our common duty to be honest in our communication with the European citizens. Third, how can the Union further externalise its attractiveness? This is another key question to address when looking towards our future. How can we stay attractive as a Union? The answer is clear: enlarging our European family by accepting new members will only strengthen the Union. The historic decisions taken by the European Council last December on the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, as well as on Bosnia and Herzegovina and on Georgia, are a victory for the entire European Union. This Parliament has been strongly supportive of this objective, and I thank you for this. Romania has – and I personally have – strongly supported and promoted it. I think that it confirms the Union's attractiveness at the time of hardship, strengthens its geopolitical weight, and creates opportunities for Member States and candidate countries alike. Enlargement is an essential part of our strategic response to the geopolitical developments and the key investment in lasting peace, stability and democracy in our neighbourhood. At the same time, the European Union must assume a leading global role in preserving the international order as a precondition for preserving our way of life and our values. The European Union's economic weight must be mirrored by its international political role. The challenges we are facing are global and some of them can only be solved by promoting relationships with partners with similar values ​​and interests. Ensuring this strategic network of resilient partnerships will make us stronger and more competitive in the long run. This is why we need to intensify our global outreach towards Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America, and we do need to further consolidate the transatlantic link – this is crucial for our success. Two last questions. Do we have the means to achieve our goals? Which is the way forward and what is the future of the Union? The Union has the legal and institutional instruments to achieve its goals, and the response to the pandemic and the crisis that followed is illustrative. But it is equally obvious that we need to streamline our decision-making capacity. We need to closely analyze what measures can be taken in a context where some consider that the real efficiency of decision-making mechanisms is impossible without reopening the Treaties, while others radically rule out this possibility. There is no doubt that measures such as those discussed in relation to the qualified majority voting in specific areas of foreign and security policy can be taken without reopening the Treaties. Without excluding changes to the Treaties at some point, we need to use all available possibilities under the existing Treaties for smoother and quicker decision-making. Romania is fully engaged in this exercise. Honorable Members of the European Parliament, despite the views of some, we are stronger now than five years ago. We showed remarkable unity in probably the most dire circumstances we had to face as a Union. Nevertheless, we have a lot of work ahead of us. Our European common construction is, after all, work in progress. As stated by Jacques Delors, the visionary European leader whom we recently paid homage to, 'The European model is in danger if we obliterate the principle of personal responsibility'. Therefore, dear colleagues, it is our shared responsibility to do the best for all our citizens. We have a special responsibility towards our youth. The future generations are looking towards us with hope and optimism in times of geopolitical volatility and socioeconomic distress. The future of Europe is about the capacity of the Union to give them honest answers and to deliver in education, health, prosperity, climate security and employment opportunities. Five years ago, we adopted the Sibiu Declaration. The ten commitments made back then are still valid. Unity, solidarity, cohesion, the rule of law – they continue to lie at the very core of our joint European action. For my part, I remain deeply faithful to these valuable values ​​and principles in my future endeavours, and I am convinced that these are the basis for the work done by you here in the European Parliament as well. I also believe that together we are able to maintain the Union on the path of success, staying true to our vision of a united and stronger Europe.
[EN] Manfred | Weber said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group . – Madam President, Commissioner Šefčovič, President Iohannis, it is good to have you in the European Parliament. Welcome. I want to start with a quote: ‘We cannot ignore the challenges we face on the eastern flank. Security and defence are fundamental components of the Union’s future’. These, Mr President, are your words from the Munich Security Conference in 2019. I was in the audience. You were right then, and you are right now. The war in Ukraine has been a wake—up call for many, but not for you. When you entered into office in 2014, you said that defence was one of the priorities for Romania and for Europe. In 2017, you managed to get the Romanian Parliament to increase defence spending to meet the NATO 2% commitment, and in 2023, Romania committed to spend 2.5% of its GDP for defence. It is your determination that made Romania a strong pillar of European defence and one of Ukraine’s greatest allies. This is leadership at its best – not speaking about problems, but solving them. Dear President Iohannis, when we look at Romania today, we see a true European success story. Since joining the European Union in 2007, Romania has become Eastern Europe’s second—largest economy at an impressive speed, and a modern, attractive country. Bucharest is number one in the Balkans for building up start-ups; Cluj—Napoca is a true European tech hub. This is a country full of talent that is fighting to turn brain drain into brain gain. Great leaders are not only great at the national level, but they are also great on European level. You also reminded us that in the Sibiu EU summit in 2019 – the first EU summit to be held on Europe Day – you got all leaders to agree on a Europe that protects its citizens. You have advanced many EU defence initiatives, always working for a strong EU pillar in a strong NATO. You started many strategic discussions on enlargement, and it was also your strong voice in the European Council that made it possible to open the accession talks with Ukraine and Moldova last December. Europe owes a lot to Romanian leadership and Romania owes a lot to your leadership. You showed Romanian citizens that a modern, pro-European Romania is possible and is successful. I also want to thank the Romanian Commissioner and all Romanian colleagues in the plenary who also served this broader perspective. Dear President Iohannis, for us in the EPP there is no doubt that Romania must fully join the Schengen Area. You have been ready for 13 years on this subject. If planes and ships are crossing borders without inspection, why should cars and trucks have to wait in endless lines? Romania and Bulgaria must mean Schengen. It’s good for security, it’s good for the business, and it’s good for our citizens. In the middle of the Brexit crisis in 2019, the spirit of Sibiu was fresh air to relaunch Europe. Now, five years later – if I may say this from an EP point of view – the EP family will go to Bucharest for the congress. We will go to Romania to kick off our campaign and to kick off the campaign for the European elections. Once again, Romania is the place to shape a safer home for all Europeans. Thanks for your leadership.
[EN] Juan Fernando | López Aguilar said from the S-D that On behalf of the S&D Group. – Madam President Metsola, Mr. President Iohannis, after listening to you carefully and respectfully, I would like to share two positive messages with you. The first: I am sure you know how many of us in this European Parliament celebrated that, finally, during the Spanish Presidency, at the end of December, the restrictions on full enjoyment of the Schengen area were lifted, and therefore, of the fundamental right to free movement at sea and air borders with Romania and Bulgaria. You don't know how many times we have called for this in this European Parliament in a history of resolutions—the latest in 2022 and 2023—since the Commission decided in 2011 that Romania and Bulgaria had passed the verification mechanism. Therefore, congratulations, Romanians and Bulgarians, who enjoy Schengen. And the second positive message is the recognition of European solidarity on the front lines facing people displaced by Putin's brutal war of aggression against Ukraine. At least three million people, mostly women and children in vulnerable situations, have entered the European Union through Romania's borders. And at least 200,000 remain in Romania, enjoying the Temporary Protection Directive, which means visa-free movement, free choice of residence, access to the labor market and labor market-related services, as well as the rights to education and healthcare. Therefore, this solidarity at the forefront of the Temporary Protection Directive is also recognized. Just yesterday, this European Parliament approved €1.5 billion for the Solidarity Fund and €1.5 billion to support immigration policy, which reinforces the rights of people who have entered the European Union seeking protection through the Temporary Protection Directive.
[EN] Valérie | Hayer said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew Group. – Madam President, Mr President, Commissioner, dear colleagues, Romania is entering an election year: parliamentary, presidential, European and local elections. These elections will be crucial, and it is a powerful symbol to see that Romanians will be writing both their national and European future in the space of a few months, because the values and interests of Romanians are firmly anchored in the European project. I could mention our fight against corruption, our resolute support for the European Public Prosecutor's Office and the work of your compatriot, Laura Codruța Kövesi, who is doing tremendous work across Europe after having done so from Bucharest. These values, this rule of law, are the basis of our European community of destiny. Our family, Renew Europe, will fight to the end to protect them, to strengthen them, to establish them. The elections I mentioned will take place in an era of increasing foreign interference on our soil. Institutions will have to be robust because cyber protection and the fight against disinformation are a major challenge, as are the rhetoric of the far right, which unfortunately only serves division and hatred, in Romania as elsewhere. Your responsibility – to protect democracy and institutions – will therefore be great, Mr President, and it is because we form this community of destiny that I welcome the lifting of controls at the air and sea borders with Romania, but also, next month, with Bulgaria. I assure this Chamber today: our political group will continue to defend the lifting of controls at land borders, too. This is fundamental and a priority. This community of destiny is also the close bond we are forging with the Ukrainian people. Their fight is also ours. Their security is also ours. In this House, I welcome Romania's major role in supporting Ukraine, because when our continent's security is threatened, we act together. I also want to say a word to Moldova. I am delighted, as is my group, that these two countries are continuing, and even accelerating, their progress towards our Union. Mr President, dear colleagues, this election year is of crucial importance, not only for Romania, but also for the whole of Europe. Our freedoms and our institutions are at stake. It is the responsibility of all of us to protect them.
[EN] Nicolae | Ştefănuță said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group. – Madam President, Mr President, Ministers, Commissioner, today we are talking about the future of Europe and Romania and we all want peace, freedom, equality. The reality now is not like that. A lot of Romanians are still leaving the country. We do not have new hospitals and we have a poor population. Millions of young people do not know what to hope for from the future. In order for populism and extremism not to grow, and you have said it too, democracy must go hand in hand with a good life. Romanians and Bulgarians are still waiting in queues at customs and want to enter Schengen with dignity and fullness this year. Mr President, thank you for the commitment you are giving to Ukraine and for your Euro-Atlantic orientation. It is a fair fight, but because your mandate and our mandate in the European Parliament is coming to an end, let us ask ourselves. What Romania are we leaving behind for our young people? What Europe are we leaving for them? What did we set out to do in Sibiu, the city I come from? Let's put the future of young people at the center of politics. Young people need to be listened to, heard, helped! I want us to fight for a Romania that offers young people affordable housing, decent jobs, health services, including mental health. We need decent dormitories for today's students. Our future doctors, teachers, architects study in damp dormitories, with 4-5 in the same room. The future president of Romania, Mr. President, is in such a dormitory today. How do we treat him or her? What do we offer him or her? Let's also take care of the environment. I know that you care about the environment and I care a lot about this component and the entire Green family does. What would a Romania with greener cities, with cleaner air, with fast trains be like? A Romania with healthy food and with more respect for nature, soil, forests, bees and animals be like. I would like to leave my little daughter, who is four years old today, I would like to leave such a continent and such a country. Young people, and this is a very important idea, do not want to live in a country with the far right in power. That is why I ask you, Mr. President, not to allow a fascist government in Romania. We do not need a new referendum of hatred either. Europe loves human rights and the right of a person to love whomever they want. And because we had a case here in the European Parliament, Romania must make sure, Mr. President, that it does not allow Russian agents to do politics for Romanians. Emil Cioran said "Romania's past does not flatter me and I am not proud that our ancestors slept for so long waiting for freedom". Today we are free. We are not waiting for freedom, but we will not give in to extremists either. We have what we need, we have resources, but above all we have a heart for a better Romania.
[EN] Cristian | Terheş said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR Group . – Madam President, Commissioner, President, dear colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, the ‘This is Europe’ debates held in the European Parliament are a great opportunity for European political leaders to express their vision about the current and future course of Europe. I congratulate, therefore, the Romanian President, Klaus Iohannis, for sharing his vision about Europe and emphasising the importance of Romania for the European project. But since the debate is about Europe, before we talk about what Europe is, it is imperative to look back and see what Europe was, how this project started, where it is heading, and if this new direction has anything in common with the initial project. When Ms von der Leyen held her speech in this plenary in 2019, she said that the European project is based ‘on Roman law and Greek philosophy’. She forgot one, and the most important pillar of the European project, the Judeo-Christian values, civilisation and culture. It was the Christian belief and Judeo-Christian values, based on the Bible, that gave the power and motivation to many political leaders from different European nations that killed, destroyed and decimated each other during the Second World War to meet after the war, pray together, forgive and reconcile with each other, and come up with an economical and political plan that would and did bring peace through prosperity. Because of these visionary, faithful and courageous political leaders, Western Europe was able to achieve peace and hold it for over 80 years, which was unprecedented for Europe. I say ‘Western Europe’ because, us in Eastern Europe were under the Soviet occupation and we experienced a different kind of political and economic system, an atheistic one, in which the state and the Communist Party were God, where the state was above all and people were deprived of their basic fundamental rights. The difference between the two political and economic systems that Europe experienced after the Second World War – the European project that we witness here, which evolved in the European Community and Union in Western Europe, and the USSR and the Soviet Marxist and communist model in Eastern Europe – is exactly the pillar that was intentionally or not forgotten by Ursula von der Leyen: the Judeo-Christian values, culture and civilisation. The Judeo-Christian values are the source of and notions that later evolved and were mentioned in international treaties, national constitutions and laws like human dignity, equality before the law, the separation of powers in the state or inalienable fundamental human rights. Robert Schuman, a founding father of the European Project and former President of the European Parliament, said, ‘Democracy owes its existence to Christianity [...] Christianity teaches equality of all nature of all men, children of the same God, redeemed by the same Christ, without distinction of race, colour, class or profession [...] Democracy will be Christian or it won’t exist. An unchristian democracy is a caricature which sinks into tyranny or anarchy.’ It was exactly these Judeo-Christian values that brought peace, prosperity, respect among nations in Western Europe, and the lack of them that brought tyranny, abuse and poverty in the USSR, in Eastern Europe. It was this faith in God that my fellow Romanians held strong under communism and motivated them to dream and fight for freedom. It is therefore incomprehensible for many fellow Romanians why in the past 40 years exactly these personal and national freedoms have been violated by the European Commission under Ursula von der Leyen. The European project was built on a free market principle which was brought, which has brought prosperity in Western Europe. In the past four years, under the current European Commission, we see that free market principles are becoming an overregulated one, which is making the European businesses and products less likely to be competitive on the global market. The European project was built on the concept that fundamental human rights are inalienable, and the governments must not force or impose medical products into citizens bodies, but allowed them to decide based on their free and informed consent. We saw what happened during the pandemic, when people were forced to be vaccinated with medical products that we find out now, later on, have many adverse effects. Europe has long been a reference of democracy and human rights, championing principles of liberty, equality and the rule of law. An erosion of these fundamental rights, even by EU entities, represents a betrayal of our shared values and must be met with firm opposition. The Romanian nation, which I most proudly represent, was able to overcome any challenges during history and become today one of the fastest growing economies in Europe. We did it through faith and fight for freedom.
[EN] Gunnar | Beck said from the ID that on behalf of the ID Group . – Madam President, Mr Commissioner, Your Excellency, Romania’s motor insurance industry has been in turmoil in recent years: 12 companies providing motor insurance have been driven out of business in just 12 years. A total of 12 insurance fails in 12 years should raise serious concerns about the regulatory environment in the Member State. In 2019, the Romanian insurance regulator ASF asked Euroins Romania to buy the then-failing City Insurance. Just three years later, ASF suspended Euroins’ insurance license in Romania, apparently for questionable reasons. This was Romania’s last motor insurer gone. Last year, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development raised questions with the Romanian Finance Minister about the actions of ASF and submitted a resolution proposal to your predecessor to the effect. The European insurance watchdog, EIOPA, wrote a report about the Euroins affair. In a reply to my written question, the Commission claims it never saw the report. To date, I’m denied access to the full details of the EIOPA report. What are ASF and EIOPA trying to hide from the Commission and Members of Parliament? One observation following the decision to strip Euroins of its licence: ASF awarded a licence to Eazy Asigurări, a subsidiary of Superbet. And who’s the chairman of Superbet? One of Commission President Ursula von der Leyen’s brothers. Your Excellency, Romania is one of the largest net recipients of EU money. You are receiving EUR 10 billion from the European budget and the NextGenerationEU fund. According to the Corruption Perception Index of Transparency International, you are the second most corrupt country in the European Union. Now, none of this is ideal for a country hoping to attract foreign investors. What, I am asking, are you proposing to do about it?
[EN] Clare | Daly said from the The Left that on behalf of The Left Group . – Madam President and President, I listened very carefully to your opening remarks. And for me, I think, Romania is one of the most interesting European countries. I think the Romanian people are pretty much like the Irish people, in my experience, in terms of their approach to life. I spent a month in Timişoara and Bucharest in the spring of 1990 as a student leader from Ireland, and learned so much about the hopes and aspirations of Romanian citizens in the post-Ceauşescu years. And I think against that backdrop, for me, it’s quite unfortunate to see that, since joining the EU, so many Romanian people have been forced to leave the country or been hoovered up by Western Europe as a sort of pool of cheap labour, rather than having the opportunities that they should have had at home. I’m sorry to see that you ended up joining NATO and that you’re spending so much of your defence money on things that really should be spent on making people’s lives better. And I am sorry to see cases such as the one highlighted by my colleague about the very, very serious problems and questions that remain to be answered regarding the operation of the Romanian regulator, the ASF, because of the consequential impact not just on your own drivers, but also across the EU motor insurance sector. And I, too, am one of the Members of this House who for many months now have been raising questions about that regulator’s decision to withdraw the licence to Euroins Romania, which is obviously part of the largest independent insurance group in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe. Now, I know you know about that case, Mr President – and not just because my colleague raised it – but it is beyond curious that the Romanian regulator acted against this company three years after requesting them to take over City Insurance. Why did they do this? It is a fact that both the Bulgarian financial regulator and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development queried what your regulator was up to. Both of them approached the European authorities. One of the organisations produced a report cautioning against the consequences of this. They even produced a resolution proposal which would have mitigated the impacts, but nothing happened. And your country faces exposure to a EUR 500 million lawsuit, not to mention the broader impact beyond. Having brought this to the attention of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, who are supposed to mitigate these issues but who have failed to produce the report for Members of this Parliament – it’s been withheld from us – I’m deeply concerned about the security around this case. So I suppose my question, Mr President, is really quite a simple one. In the interests of the citizens of Romania and beyond, would you join us in supporting our call to the European Commission to initiate a comprehensive and independent review of this case?
[EN] Ioan-Rareş | Bogdan said from the PPE that – Madam President, Your Excellencies, today, the big day, I will speak my language. Madam President, I had the privilege of listening to you together with the analysis and vision of a true statesman, Klaus Iohannis, the President of Romania for the last 9 years, voted twice by almost seven million Romanians each time. You listened to the speech of a man with a European vocation about Europe and the European construction. It is not a simple speech. This is Romania, distinguished colleagues. The most important country for ensuring EU security on the Black Sea and the country that has 650 kilometers of border with Ukraine. In Romania, over 7 million Ukrainians, women, elderly people and children fleeing the war have received shelter in the last two years. Romanians have not blocked their borders for a moment, nor have they looked with hostility at those who sought to save their lives and those of their children. On the contrary, at the institutional level, led by President Iohannis and at the human level, every Romanian has opened his heart and home to refugees. We are neither the richest in Europe nor the most helped in Europe, but we have an ancestral cult for hospitality and help. This is Romania, a sincere country, although it is the most attacked country in the EU in the information war waged by a dictator, Putin, against Western civilization. The Kremlin has understood that Romania is a colossal stake and is investing massively in corrupting the minds of voters and in trying to destabilize Romania and dynamite the European Union from within. It is trying to dynamite the values ​​of Western civilization. However, I assure you that Romanians will remain Europeans par excellence, and President Iohannis will guarantee this until the last day of his mandate. This is Romania, the country with the greatest energy potential in the European Union, and on whose investments, financed also from European money, not a little, but not enough, Europe's energy independence will largely depend. President Iohannis, as you have convinced yourself, is a balanced and rational head of state, deeply European, as I would like to see other heads of state, especially in Romania's neighboring areas. He is a president who has admirably balanced the interest of his country, without affecting the interest of Europe in the region. The time of individualities and arrogance is over. The future will demonstrate that balance gains strength in the face of recklessness. In my country, there is a song sung for the first time 150 years ago. It is called Hora Unirii, and the lyrics are "Where there is one, there is no power, for need and for pain. Where there are two, there is power and the enemy does not increase." The Union Hour, in this complicated period full of security challenges, can be adapted as a message, as a true anthem of today's Europe.
[EN] Maria | Grapini said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr President, esteemed Minister and the entire team, at the beginning I want to thank you for describing my country so beautifully. That is true and I would like, esteemed colleagues, those who have tried to blame it today, to understand Romania. Visit it first, talk to the people there and understand it. Mr President, I will be objective. I want to raise the issues that I have raised with all the heads of state and government and ask you: do you really like the way Europe looks now? Do you think more could have been done? Is there really social cohesion? Is there fairness? I am the Vice-President of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and I refuse to use the term “single market” that you used, as did Commissioner Breton. I do not think it is a single market and that is what we must fight for, Mr President. I end my second term with a bitter taste that Romania is not in the internal market, that we are not in Schengen and it is unfair, and colleagues from all political groups have said it. Then, do you think that the common agricultural policy (CAP) is fair? Why have we not had this fairness for so long? Farmers from all states, if we have a single internal market in all states, should be equally rewarded. I think there are things that could have been resolved during this period and I do not think that you should not insist, even on the last hundred meters, Mr. President, because, as we know well, the Council ultimately decides how Europe should go and where.
[EN] Dacian | Cioloş said from the Renew that – Madam President, Mr. President, the 2024 election year is crucial for Europe, because the values ​​on which it has been built and operated so far are under siege from extremism, anti-Europeanism and disinformation. Therefore, in order to keep democracy alive, this year's debates must be relevant to the daily lives of citizens and less to the survival of political parties or political leaders. For Romania, the challenge is even greater. We have all the rows of elections this year. This could lead to a total reset of the political establishment and, despite a slow advance on the European path, Romania has become, through the efforts of the entire society, a key actor in the part of the Union in which it is located, an eastern pillar of the Union. Mr. President Klaus Iohannis, you are the last political actor who will leave the stage after this year's elections without a personal electoral stake. Until then, you have the duty to watch over, ensure and communicate to Romanian citizens the importance of our European membership in a complicated year, with populist challenges, and I believe that you can do this in a credible and responsible manner. Romania and the European Union cannot afford to slip into extremist ideas without solutions and all this electoral pressure also raises the question of the leadership profile that the Romanian and European citizen expects today. Because, after many disappointments, Romanians have the feeling that political leaders no longer speak to them enough and too little in their language when they do. The effort to recreate bridges in our crisis-affected society will be great, but the cause is essential both for us and for the Union as a whole and for its future, for the credibility of the Union. Farmers, young people without prospects, ignored citizens from peripheral counties or small towns, must be remotivated and engaged in a vision of the future in which they can find themselves and in which Brussels or Strasbourg are their allies, not their imagined enemies.
[EN] Anna | Deparnay-Grunenberg said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, this is Europe. And yes, we have no choice but to stand up together, ladies and gentlemen, for our climate stability and our biodiversity. We need Romania and its treasure troves of primary and virgin forests. I call on you, President Iohannis, to work to protect these forests. I have been to Romania several times, to the Făgăraș Mountains and many beautiful places, and I have seen the beauty of your unique forests. I have seen countless animal and plant species – endemic ones. But I have also seen the advancing deforestation, clear-cutting as far as the eye can see, and unfortunately also illegal logging in Natura 2000 areas, huge furrows in the earth and severe erosion because there are no longer any roots to hold the slopes. Four years ago, the EU initiated infringement proceedings. The Romanian government promised improvements and measures. Corruption and illegal logging are still commonplace. That's why I'm asking you today, President Iohannis: How are you progressing with the agreed reforms to forestry training and logging tracing? And what are you doing for environmental activists? The EU is looking to you; we need your help.
[EN] Anna | Bonfrisco said from the ID that Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. President Iohannis, in March you will lead Romania into the Schengen area. This is a historic moment, and it will strengthen the European Union and your country. I proudly welcome you, also representing Italy, as Romania and Italy will add a new piece to their friendship, founded on deep and ancient historical, social, human, economic, commercial, and cultural ties rooted in Judeo-Christian values. Over 1,000,000 Romanian citizens live in Italy, and 19,000 Italian companies are headquartered in Romania. Our states are growing and can grow together. We are also bound by the NATO alliance; Romania is part of the Sea Guardian mission for the defense of the Mediterranean, and even more so within the Schengen area, we will strengthen our alliance in the fields of police and judicial cooperation, in the fight against criminal organizations, to ensure the security of the European Union and its allies, just as Romania, with great generosity, welcomed refugees from the attack on Ukraine. However, I also take this opportunity to speak with you today to call for attention to a perhaps minor issue, but one linked to the illegal trafficking of animals and animal abuse, one of the largest sources of illegal financing for criminal organizations worldwide. We must act together, united in our history, values, economies, challenges, and the friendship we offer, a demonstration of the true meaning of Europe. Good luck, President.
[EN] Paulo | Rangel said from the PPE that – Madam President, President Iohannis, Madam Commissioner, Herta Müller once wrote: ‘In this country, we had to walk, eat, sleep and love in fear’. When we read about life in Communist times, we can only appreciate Romania’s success in the European project. Romanian culture and heritage is indispensable for Europe because it merges the Roman—Latin culture with Orthodox heritage and with Germanic, Slavic and Magyar influence. That gives Romanians a unique ability to understand European diversity. We have seen Romania’s amazing economic development under your Presidency and impressive progress in the rule of law. Today, when we see attacks on the rule of law in Spain, in Malta, in Slovakia, we have to congratulate you, Mr President, for your exemplary leadership. We have an historic step in the lifting of air and sea border controls, but that is not enough. Romania, like Bulgaria, must fully join Schengen. You dealt with the migration crisis, pandemic restrictions and the arrival of war refugees in an extraordinary manner under immense pressure. The EPP has always been on your side in this matter. As the great Romanian poet Mihai Eminescu once wrote, ‘vreme trece, vreme vine’, or ‘time goes by, time comes along’. The time for complete and full accession to Schengen has come.
[EN] Marc | Angel said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr President Iohannis, it is a great honor for us to be able to welcome you here in the House of European Democracy. And we naturally welcome the fact that Romanian citizens in the Schengen area will now be able to cross air and sea borders without checks. However, as socialists and social democrats, we are very disappointed that controls at the national borders will remain in place, causing many lost hours and a lot of discontent – this is harmful to the climate and the economy. And incidentally, aid intended for Ukraine has also been blocked for a long time. This is incomprehensible and unjust, and therefore we will not give up calling on the Council to immediately decide to abolish border controls. Romania, as well as Bulgaria, have earned this through hard work. This development will further strengthen our European family and our common project. Mr President, We are facing enormous challenges, one of which is the digitalization of our societies. I recently had the honor of participating in an event hosted by my Romanian colleague Victor Negrescu on digital skills in rural areas. In this context, I was able to learn about some very interesting projects in Romania. Therefore, I wanted to ask you how you view the challenges of digital transformation in Europe and what recipes for success you would share with us. Do we need to continue regulating, or—which I hope not—do we let the tech giants and algorithms run wild?
[EN] Vlad-Marius | Botoş said from the Renew that – Madam President, esteemed Madam Minister, esteemed Mr President, I feel honored that the President of Romania is addressing the European Parliament in Strasbourg. Romania is a neighbor of Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, where Russia does not want to stop exercising its influence. Romania is a coastal country of the Black Sea, where the war affects all the states in the area and not only. Therefore, it is very important that Romania remains a truly democratic country, anchored in European values. This is Europe, this is the theme of our debate today, and Romania has been part of the European Union for 17 years. We constantly see the development and modernization of our country, to which the 90 billion euros in European funds have significantly contributed, but also the fact that Romanian citizens have access to a single market, to the European economy and culture, even if we are not yet full members of the Schengen area. Here we should press the accelerator harder and I am glad that you also said it clearly today, in this plenary. Romania has demonstrated that it has European values ​​in its DNA and promotes them. Even when Romanian politicians have made wrong decisions, citizens have fiercely defended and still defend European values, democracy and the rule of law, and Europe means the rule of law. And this formula has a terrible weight in the lives of each of us. We all have a set of rules and no one, no matter how high their position, is above these rules. While we are talking about rules, maybe it wouldn't hurt to all remember that rules are rules when it comes to elections, and the trust of every European citizen in the European institutions will be all the greater if we manage to explain openly, step by step, not only what they can do for Europe, but also what Europe does for them every day. We will not be able to do this if the debate in Romania is tried to be moved elsewhere, at the same time as the European elections in the same year.
[EN] Damian | Boeselager said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, Mr President, thank you, President Iohannis, for sharing your perspectives on our common European future. Very often this House is used for national debates, even from prime ministers and presidents, so I am very thankful that you shared your vision for what Europe should look like. So let me ask you quite concretely, when do you think can we have an improved decision-making in the Council? When will we move to qualified majority? When can we actually change the Treaties? I would love to hear an answer on that. And then second, we have a great moment of European democracy coming up with the European elections. But looking at the different countries and also at Romania, I do see inhibiting factors to democracy, such as the amount of signatures you need to collect to be able to run as a party, such as the fact that you have, I think, to be 23 to be able to be a candidate. These are all things that could potentially slow down our democratic participation. So maybe the last question on this: will you advance the European electoral law act that we proposed here in 2020, with the second vote for transnational lists to strengthen our European democracy?
[EN] Sven | Simon said from the PPE that – Madam President, Mr. President Iohannis, you are a president who has always championed reforms in your own country. You stand for a strong constitutional state. Your fight against corruption is exemplary. And it is largely thanks to you that Romania is now becoming part of the Schengen Agreement. We now need precisely this strength for reform at the European level. The European Union was founded to protect Europeans from one another. Today we must develop it further to protect Europeans from one another in the world. A few months ago, the European Parliament put forward reform proposals with the aim of making the European Union more effective. The Council is struggling to come up with a response, to decide in favor of a convention. You, Mr. President, have mentioned that we could change a great deal without amending the treaties. But if we truly want to improve internal resilience, as you said, and external capacity to act, we need a convention. That is why I am asking you today for your support in the Council for convening this convention.
[EN] Tudor | Ciuhodaru said from the S-D that – Madam President, in order to solve global problems, we must first solve those at home, in each country. I hear that we are concerned about global crises and solutions, but we have forgotten the people next to us, we have lost touch with those we represent. The dissatisfactions of Romanians are more and more numerous and are related to everyday life. Now we see the dissatisfactions of farmers and those in transport, but the truth is that the decline in living standards has affected us all. Mr President, we could have done more and more for Romania. Honorable Commission, honorable Council, you have often ignored the problems and pains of my people and my country, and here I have seen, unfortunately, too many political scoundrels who are unable, were unable to say "no" when our interests were trampled on. I can say "no" every time and I will continue to do so from now on. That's why I think it's a moment when we need to reconnect with people's problems. Each in their own country, each in their own city, and I think that's the only way we can increase their confidence that what we're doing here is only for the good of each of them. I think that's the only way Iași and Romania will be in good hands, just like the whole of Europe.
[EN] Loránt | Vincze said from the PPE that "Have a nice day!" Doamnă președintă, domnule președină, écbre cetățean român păsăță eștă urare în limba maghiară. Nu pentru că mosteline a să învețe limba minorității, ci pentru că în 2020 adţi sănătot limba maghiară ca instrument politic cțăn adversarilor dŏnă. Iar de când este presidence nu ati résup deloc la propunerera venită din parta comune comunesei maghiare de a realiza un pact majorityitate-minoritate. There is a model of success in the protection of European minorities in countries that are members of the European Union, which cannot be discussed in București, and in Romania, the extremisti have gained strength. Xenophobia, pe de o parte, și behavioratul antidemocratic, antieuropean, pe de alţo parte, provin din sălă rădăcină. Sunt de acord cu dwênje, I remain multe de façat in Romania and in the European Union for Romania. Ne atrajom pe un traseu de integrare deplenă la Uniunea Europeană. But aceea, aderarea integrală la zona Schengen trebuie să become realitate, pentru că este dechtat nostru găndătă.
[EN] Brando | Benifei said from the S-D that Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, Mr. President Iohannis, Romania is an important European country. After joining the Union in 2007, it will join the Schengen area next March. This is good news, because it speaks to us of a more united and stronger Europe, where citizens can enjoy equal rights. A Europe that, today, must face great challenges together. In recent months, we in this Parliament approved the world's first regulation regulating artificial intelligence, but that is not enough. I am thinking of the migration phenomenon, where Europe must speak with one voice, without nationalist vetoes, to finally manage the influx of human beings, from the Mediterranean as well as the Balkans, in a structured and non-emergency manner. The digital revolution, migration, but also climate change, new frontiers of employment, and the fight against inequality: these are priorities on our political agenda. The European elections are approaching and will be crucial for the future of this continent. Millions of young Europeans are demanding a better future. We must be able to guarantee it by making the right choices.
[EN] Siegfried | Mureşan said from the PPE that – Madam President, President Iohannis, welcome back to the European Parliament. We very well remember here your speech from 2018 when you stood up for European values and told us that unity and solidarity are the solutions for Europe. Time has proven you right. We have seen that Europe stays united. It provides solutions and helps people in need. We have seen you defending European values, and we have seen you defending a European approach to challenges that we are facing. Romania has chosen the pro-European path and we have seen a European decade in Romania under your leadership. And for this we say thank you today. We are seeing today that Romania believes in Europe, and we are also seeing that Europe believes in Romania. Together, we have managed over recent years to create the biggest package of economic support after the pandemic. You always advocated for strong support for Ukraine. You led the efforts of supporting the Republic of Moldova, and you helped Europe understand that we are only safe if our neighbouring countries are safe. Looking ahead, our common task is to defend Europe. Europe means security. Europe means prosperity, democracy, rule of law, and Europe means stability. As pro-Europeans, we shall continue to provide solutions and tell people that extremism is no solution to any of the difficulties and challenges that we face. As pro-Europeans, we have to speak up to defend Europe and defend European values. This is what we stand for as a clear majority of pro-Europeans here in the European Parliament. This is what we are ready to achieve in the next years together with you.
[EN] Domènec | Ruiz Devesa said from the S-D that – Madam President Metsola, Mr. President Iohannis, thank you for your words. I congratulate you on your commitment to European integration and your Europeanism. I also appreciate that you mentioned the institutional dimension in your speech. It is clear that, with an enlarged Europe, with the relaunching of the enlargement process, this process must be accompanied by the deepening of our political project on a federal level. You referred to the issue of not excluding Treaty reforms, which I welcome, and I believe we must also take a step further in that direction. You referred to the passerelle clauses. It is true: they can be activated; they are in the Lisbon Treaty to allow for the decision on more matters by qualified majority voting. But in fourteen years, the Council has not been able to activate a single one of them. I hope we do not have to wait another fourteen years. Please support Parliament's proposal to reform the Treaties.
[EN] Tsvetelina | Penkova said from the S-D that – Madam President, for more than 12 years Bulgaria and Romania have been fulfilling all the technical criteria for our accession to the Schengen area, for full Schengen membership. This fact has been assessed and repeatedly confirmed here, in the plenary hall of the European Parliament. However, for political reasons, we have been kept outside the Schengen area for over a decade, and our fellow citizens are treated as second-hand Europeans. We are fulfilling our obligations, and our fellow citizens are deprived of their due rights. That is why we should not delude ourselves that the partial membership of Bulgaria and Romania in Schengen is a success. Mr. President, I have a few questions for you. What are the common actions that you are discussing with Bulgaria to lead to the abolition of land transport checks as soon as possible? What do you think is a realistic deadline for our due full Schengen membership? This discriminatory attitude towards Bulgarian and Romanian citizens cannot continue.
[EN] Nikos | Papandreou said from the S-D that – Madam President, I would like to thank the Romanian President for his presentation today. Our two countries have similar histories, not just in Christian orthodoxy, but we had dictatorships – you had a totalitarian country run by the Kremlin, we had a dictatorship run by the Pentagon. Today we see clouds gathering over Europe. We have the European elections. I would like your wisdom and your experience. How do we convince the voter that the solution is not the extreme populists, but more democracy? That we need a new contract for the citizens of Europe? That’s what I would call it, a ‘contract’ to complete the European project, something that most of the Members here and the farmers in the streets feel has not been completed. So it’s our duty and your wisdom, perhaps, in the answer, will help us come up with the proper arguments to bring about the Europe of our dreams.
[EN] Klaus | Iohannis said from the NULL that President of Romania . – Madam President, honourable Members of the European Parliament, thank you very much. This is a privilege for me to speak to you here in the centre of European democracy. Thank you for your very positive feedback. I thank the speakers of the political groups for their positions, and I appreciate very much the positive and constructive approach in all the views expressed here. But let me thank you specifically for one issue, most of all mentioned, which is the Schengen issue. Romania is a very determined, a very strong and a very faithful member of the Union. We really believe that the Union has to be united, strong, secure, prosperous. To make this happen, we have to finish the European integration of all the Member States, including Romania. So let’s hope that we make the decisive step. We have the first step in place. It is a good sign, and let’s continue. There have been then some issues and – I think you agree – it would go too far if I answered each and every question. So let me just point out a relatively small number of issues, and I think you expect me to be honest on these things. So I’ll try to be short and honest. When I ran for president in 2014, for the first time, I promised to the Romanians a couple of things. I’m not a great speaker, and I am not excelling in promises, so I said I will keep Romania firm on the European track, on the transatlantic track. I will see about the economy as far as the president can do this to bring more prosperity. But one important issue, which was very dear to me – I promised to strengthen the rule of law, which I did. We have less corruption. We have an independent judiciary. And this is not what I say – it is what the Commission says and what you said because you accepted the Commission’s report on the so-called CVM. And one important issue was not only to have an independent judiciary, a strong prosecution – it was also important to have independent regulators. Well, I heard that one regulator had an issue with one business, and as everywhere in a democracy and the rule of law, people, if they feel that decision was not so good, go before a judge. This is what happened, and the judges decided that the decision was correct. This is what I understand if we speak about the rule of law: everybody has the same right. Everybody has the right to a fair trial, and everybody has to accept the result. Now, many of you asked more or less precisely what I believe should happen in the European Union. I stated a number of issues in my opening remarks, but if it comes to it, what should we do with the Union to make it function better? Where are the problems? Where are the real problems? Where are the systemic problems and what can be done? Well, some systemic problems and some important issues have been discussed in this House, on our streets, in the marketplaces, and in convenings. I think you just finished before I arrived a discussion about the common European agricultural policy. That’s an issue. We have a decision on this as of 2020, four years ago. So obviously, people ask me and I ask others, ‘Why did it take us four years and huge European protests to rethink some issues of the common agricultural policy?’ Maybe it could have happened faster. We are talking about the environment, about climate change. That’s all correct. Personally, I’m very much involved in these issues. I am really convinced that we have to fight climate change, and I believe that we have to protect our environment, and we can do it. We proved it. We proved it in Romania, and we have a good policy in this respect. But we have to do more. Now we have the Green Deal, which is super. But let me tell you, if it is not sustainable and if it does not lead to economic growth, and if we do not take everybody with us, it will be a failure. So, bref , elections upcoming – most of you are probably running for new mandate. That’s fine. Not me, I’m finished. At the end of this year, I finish my mandate and that’s it. So I believe that three things should be changed or should be improved. First, our relationship with the European citizens. My impression – maybe I’m wrong – is that if the citizens are here, we are here. We are levitating a bit high. Maybe we should decrease and be closer to our citizens, because what we do is correct but we lost, almost lost, our ability to explain this to our people. We are not really performing well when it comes to communicating our very good results. We are doing a super job and more and more Europeans believe the Union is failing. Well, this is about communication: communication between the voters and the politicians. So this is one issue where I believe we can and should do more and better. Second, some of you asked about decision-making. It is about the architecture of the Union. How do we make it better? And we have to improve it, because if we take in Ukraine, Moldova and the Western Balkans, we will be a large Union, and this decision-making, especially in crisis, war, pandemic and energy crisis, has to be correct, transparent but fast. So I believe that we have to work on our architecture. Some of it may be possible to change without opening the Treaties, but some issues have to be changed in the Treaties. They are not perfect. Since we have these Treaties – I hope you don’t mind me telling you – years have passed. We are a different Union and we work towards a different Union. I hope very much you agree: we work towards a better Union, so let’s work on this. At least one issue – and you will know what I mention – it is not acceptable that one member is using a veto to stop all of us helping others. So if we’re not in a position yet to generalise a qualified majority voting, which may be defined different than it is now, not talking about the details, but at least we should have the courage to say ‘no veto’ and let’s take it out of the decision-making process. That’s something very concrete we should do. Finally, our external image, well, I believe we have to be much better here. First, we have to integrate those who want to be with us and those we want to be with us: Ukraine, Moldova, Western Balkans. They try to become part of the Union, some of them for 20 years. I mean, are we serious? Are we? Do we want them? If we do, let’s go. If not, let’s say to them ‘no’. But dragging on, you know very well, never makes things better. Somehow linked to this is how we act towards others. It is what we call foreign policy. Well, guess what? We don’t have one. This is strange, isn’t it? We have as many foreign policies as we have Member States, and maybe even more. Thanks, you’re right. Maybe this is the reason why our foreign policy weight is way, way, way smaller than our economic weight. This is not good for us because economic policy and foreign policy have to go hand in hand. So we should work on these two: extension and foreign policy. Now, the elections are upcoming. Each of you is going to fight for a seat or a principle or a value. That’s correct. Every party comes up with concepts, with ideas, with policies. You will accuse each other of being, well, the wrong guys. You will fight for as many votes as possible. That’s absolutely fair. That’s the essence of democracy: campaigning, profiling, trying to be the best. Please do so. You sitting here are the best. This is why you sit here. But please, if you fight each other, don’t fight Europe. If you fight for votes against your opponents, still fight for European Union. And if you fight with the other party and tell them they are not the right guys, please do not fight against the European solidarity. Because without this we are doomed. So no matter who is winning – and I hope the best are winning – let us uphold our values, our principles, our unity, and our solidarity.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that The debate is closed. Written statements (Rule 171)
[EN] Victor | Negrescu said from the S-D that in writing . – The benefits of Romania's accession to the EU are countless and tangible for Romanians. Since joining the European Union until now, Romania has recorded a positive balance of over 62 billion euros compared to its financial obligations as a member state. Most of the investments in schools, hospitals, roads made at national and local level could not have been made without European funds because both public institutions and most private companies depend on the existence of these funds for development. At the same time, hundreds of thousands of Romanians have had access to education and professional training by accessing European resources and opportunities, while Romanian farmers have survived global competition, benefiting from subsidies received from the EU and accessing European funds. Whether we are talking about the right to free movement and the European internal market or about access to European funds, security or essential rights conferred by European legislation, today's European Romania is stronger and safer than the Romania of 17 years ago.
