[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Dear colleagues, we have with us today the Prime Minister of Slovenia, Robert Golob. Prime Minister, dear Robert, let me start by thanking you for accepting our invitation to address the European Parliament as part of our ‘This is Europe’ series of debates. These have been difficult days for Europe, and it is time to re-affirm our values. The war in Ukraine is continuing unabatedly. Pushed back on the battlefield, the Kremlin has increasingly turned its war machine onto innocent civilians, weaponising basic commodities in a desperate attempt to get Ukraine – and Europe – to concede. I am proud of our clear, united and unwavering European response, because our values – our freedom, our liberty, our democracy – are non-negotiable. The people of Ukraine are fighting precisely for these values. And yet this does not mean that the consequences are not being felt. People in Slovenia are worried. People in Europe are worried. They are worried about heating their homes; about getting to the end of the month; about paying their bills. This is the time when European leadership is needed the most. This means common actions, solidarity in gas supply, and the creation of the credible energy single market. This is how we address our citizens’ concerns in the short term. But we also need to be clear: our surest way of achieving full energy independence is by speeding up our green transition and this has become just as much about security as it is about climate ambition. This is not the time to backtrack. Prime Minister, with two-thirds of Slovenia’s power generation being CO2-free and by further pledging to increase the use of renewable energy by 2030, your country is already showing leadership in this field. What is more, by increasing interconnections with its neighbours, Slovenia is well on track to improve its energy resilience. I look forward to see this same commitment reflected by all Member States within our Union. Prime Minister, I also see Slovenian leadership when it comes to accelerating the integration process of the Western Balkans, and here I speak more specifically about Bosnia and Herzegovina. This year, we have already seen – with Ukraine and with Moldova – what a powerful message EU candidacy status can give. My hope for us is to have this same courage also with our friends in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Dear Prime Minister, dear Robert, the floor is yours.
[EN] Robert | Golob said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Slovenia . – Dear President Metsola, distinguished Members of the European Parliament, dear citizens of Europe. I know that it will be very full later, so I will take a little time now to warm you up for what awaits you at twelve. And I hope that I will be interesting enough in my presentation. In fact, it is a great honour for me to be able to address Parliament today, to address all citizens, because I want to talk about the common future of the European Union. A common future that believes in the power of integration, in the power of cooperation and in the power of unity. Coming from a small member state of the European Union, I am acutely aware of the fact that only when we unite on the basis of our strengths and virtues and when everyone contributes what they are best at, can we form a community that will be the most successful. And when this community is united and determined, then this community can push the boundaries of what is possible. And I believe that Europe – Europe as a whole, not just the European Union – is being tested today, precisely in terms of how much strength it has to address the historic challenges it faces. After living for two years in a state of obsession with Covid, and don't worry, I won't talk about Covid today, we have had to face a situation due to Russian aggression that we haven't seen since the end of World War II on European soil. We are facing a situation in which all international norms are being violated, the sovereignty of a state is being violated on the basis of military aggression without reason. This aggression, in addition to all other implications, has extraordinary consequences for us, for all citizens of the European Union and for our economy. Not only the energy crisis, not only energy prices, all this has led to the fact that today we are also faced with an economic crisis and, above all, with price increases in all areas and record inflation. Therefore, today I will address three areas in particular. I will devote the most - given my background - to energy and the green transition, the green transition. I will also touch on the rule of law and geopolitical efforts, in which Slovenia is a small but still important stone in the mosaic. Dear ladies, dear gentlemen, let me give you just a brief background on myself in order to fully understand why I will address energy as the major topic during my speech. For the last 15 years, I was working at an energy company: a company that I founded and I was running as a CEO; a company that grew from zero up to 3 billion in revenue; a company that was the largest energy trader in southern and eastern Europe; a company that grew from zero to the largest supplier of electricity in Slovenia; and a company which in recent years was also the largest provider of solar power plants, meaning that we embarked on investing in renewables as well. Having said that, let's switch to the main topic, and that is energy. It is totally clear to everyone that overdependence on one gas source, which is from Russia, led to the weaponisation of that particular energy source during the last year, and that we are facing the consequences of that weaponisation right now. But even though the lack of supply was rightly addressed by the swift action both of the Parliament and Commission during the last weeks – meaning that just by combining the three factors which is being able to reduce the demand, being able to find new sources from friendly countries and being able to keep the pipelines open throughout Europe by implementing the solidarity clause, we were able to cover for the energy needs – it was not enough to address the prices. And this is one topic that I always emphasize whenever I speak to my colleagues at the European Council and that is that, yes, a lot has been done, but more needs to be done as well in the future. And this week is crucial in that regard. So either we address properly the high energy prices and when I say properly it means decisively, and when I say decisively, we need to implement regulatory changes in the market mechanisms because the internal energy market at the moment, I will not say it is not working, I will say is being worked by the speculative money, but for their own profits and not for the benefits of the population of Europe. And this is where the responsibility of the European Council comes into light, because it's up to us to address this issue in the proper manner. And we already asked the Commission once to come up with a set of rules, set of measures, which will adequately address this issue and I cannot say that I am happy with what the Commission has come up with. It won't work. It's not enough. We will need to be more decisive in order to reduce the volatility in the markets. We will need to be more decisive to eliminate price spikes. And we will need to be more decisive when it comes to the gas price caps. The energy ministers sit in the council of today and I certainly hope and urge that they will come to a common decision by whatever means in order to show the unity not to the population but to the markets, because we need to show the unity to the speculative traders and, remember, I made my living by doing that, so I know what I'm talking about. So we need to show them a clear message and unity that we will not be left drained. We will not let them drain our budgets. We will not let them drain the global competitiveness of our industry for their profits. It's a very important message, and that's why I'm repeating it all over the place and I'm doing it right now. But the future doesn't stop today and doesn't stop this winter, so we need to look forward, onward, and the green transition is actually not just the only way forward, but it is also the only way that addresses the three issues simultaneously. It does improve and it does bring autonomy, independence, energy independence to Europe. It is the only way to energy independence. It does mitigate climate change because that's the only way to reduce the impact of energy on climate. And it also, at the end of the day, brings lower energy prices. So we do address all three issues simultaneously and that means that, again, we cannot linger. We need to move as bold and as ambitious as possible. If that means speeding up the permitting process, well, yes. If that means building more, not just interconnectors, but more gas and pipe and power lines, yes, we do need more power lines at all levels. We can put them underground, but we need them and we need more storage capacity as well as to enable the grids to connect more renewables. And this is really the only way forward. And if we act boldly and decisively and if we link the wind potential of the north with some potential of the south – put some hydro in the mix and some storage in between – yeah, in the next 10 to 15 years, we could be totally renewable in Europe. It is a vision that is doable. Okay, it might take us five more years than that, but it's doable. And that's the most important message. And for that reason, not just because of the energy crisis that we are facing now, we really owe it, we owe it to our children to do it now because it's doable so there is absolutely no excuse that we wait with our next steps when it comes to that. Before entering politics, while I was still the executive, I was also the EU Climate Pact Ambassador. I was promoting, and sincerely promoting it, because for living I was doing energy trading but for my soul I was promoting the self-sustainable home energy systems – the systems where each of us that owns a home can become totally independent on himself, on him, on hers or his energy needs, for all energy needs. Electric vehicle, sunroof, solar heating, heat pumps and storage. By doing that, we helped thousands and thousands of households in Slovenia to become totally independent from the existing crisis. So they are not just helping the environment, at the moment they are totally independent on the energy crisis. The one thing that we are addressing all the time when it comes to the energy transition, we are always addressing the way we deal with the energy for our machines, for our technologies. But we are overlooking one important thing. This is my second message. We are overlooking the way we address the energy that we need to fuel our bodies, which is food. The food system that we are using right now is totally unsustainable for our future, totally. Unless we change the food production and food consumption in a very thorough way, we will not be able to meet any of the climate goals. Because if the rest of the world would follow in our steps, we would need seven planets just to sustain the food consumption, which is obviously not something that can be done. Now, of course, each of us can start a change in himself or herself. Changing the diet. Of course, that's easy. Just switch from less meat - I'm not saying no meat - but that's consume less meat, let's consume more plant-based food. Anyway, it's healthier, but this is not the story today. But in that way, we will help the planet and we will help our children as well. Not just by teaching them how to be healthier, but also by teaching them how to be sustainable. But that's an individual choice. What is the responsibility of the government or of the authorities? The main responsibility is the building of the awareness, scientific facts when it comes to food plus – and this is important – to enable the choice, enable the choice of healthier food to be available in public systems. That's what we did on a small scale in Slovenia back home. And the results are amazing. We didn't have to force anyone and 50% of consumers at a particular facility switched within a month on a totally plant-based food. It was an individual choice that was enabled by the authorities. Not enforced – this is very important. Going back to the other thing where the responsibility of the government or the authorities is even more crucial is, of course, the rule of law. And when it comes to the rule of law, I would share a personal story with you. As you already remember, most probably, I was minding my own business, earning lots of money and being quite happy, up to a certain point when I realized that the rule of law in Slovenia is just being eaten away. By the previous government. The judicial system was slowly being weakened. The freedom of speech and the media – especially the freedom of the media – was being taken away. And at a certain point in time, again, being happy, I just realized I don't want to live in a country where the rule of law is non-existent. This is why I stepped into politics. This is why I stepped out of my comfort zone, not in my comfort zone. And this is why I stand here. And this is so important and that's why I realized that the rule of law is not something to be negotiated about, but is something to be enforced. And that is the responsibility of all of us who are in the political system. By saying that, the first thing that comes to your mind once you have to make a decision on whether you step into a politician's role or not, is okay, how do we deal with all the exposure? The fake news exposure. Hate speech exposure. Because that's immediately what you get once you decide to step into politics. And I'm not speaking about uncoordinated or spontaneous fake news or spontaneous hate speech, I'm speaking about hate speech, which is financed and instigated by the existing political forces or lobbies - it doesn't matter what you call them. So I urge and I know that you've already done some steps when it comes to hate speech, Parliament, I know it's been the Council, the European Council again, who was blocking, who is blocking it. And I urge you to find new ways, new ways how to address the issue of paid-for hate speech with a clear, clear goal. And the goal is, you know what, to keep the dissenting people out of politics. That's really the goal. I know there is a fine balance between the freedom of speech and the hate speech, the measures against one and the measures to really improve the freedom of speech. And I'm pretty much sure you will know how to strike the balance because the freedom of speech, especially social media, they do play an important role when it comes to really bringing things to our awareness that would otherwise remain hidden. And, in this regard, I would like to especially address the Iranian situation, which would not be noticed by anyone in Europe because of the censorship unless there would be social media. And all the efforts done especially by the Iranian women and with their inventive, non-violent ways of protesting against the brutality of the regime and for their human rights, their women's rights is something to be really proud of and to give them support as much as possible. So I urge you to be loud, to keep staying loud, and to keep pointing the way forward, where they will be heard also within this particular Parliament. I know lots has been done and I urge you to do more. Let’s show them that we do know what our geopolitical responsibility is. Even though most of the time, again, within the European Council, that’s not the case. Okay, I’m switching back to Slovenian, sorry. That brings me to the last point on the agenda, to the geopolitical efforts, including Slovenia’s. If anywhere, the European Union showed responsibility and unity in the case of Russian aggression against Ukraine. And that is why I am grateful to all the institutions, including the European Council, which showed, indeed, that when necessary, we know how to be united. We knew how to be united even at the point when we used the most powerful tool that the European Union has, which is the enlargement process. I welcome the decision of all the institutions to recognise the status of candidate countries for membership of the European Union for both Ukraine and Moldova, and I welcome all the efforts, including those of Parliament, to speed up the accession process. Because the accession process or the enlargement process of the European Union is actually a tool that we are very aware of in Slovenia, because we are a relatively new member. I remember very well the hope, the hope for a better future, that this enlargement process gave us. Therefore, I understand very well what hope for a better future we are giving to the citizens of Ukraine and Moldova. And that is why I urge that we do not stop at this process. The same applies to the Western Balkans. Since the beginning of the Russian aggression, the Western Balkans have been exposed to great pressure from propaganda. Pressure that seeks to break the unity of Europe as a whole in condemning Russian aggression and, above all, in supporting Ukraine. And that is precisely why today the European Union must be aware of how much it can contribute with this political tool not only to the stability of the region, but also to ensuring that we all remain united in supporting Ukraine. It is not just about Bosnia and Herzegovina, but I will still relate to it. It is about the entire Western Balkans. But Bosnia and Herzegovina is the country that was a victim of aggression in the past. And that is precisely why we owe Bosnia and Herzegovina today that we have not forgotten it. Just as we do not want to ever forget Ukraine... in years to come. Because this is precisely the story that we must show, that we are not only giving signals at the beginning, but that we are also in a position to conclude the story. And in Bosnia, we must conclude the story, a story that began twenty years ago and has not yet taken a single step. And I know you will ask yourself, "Who should take the first step?" But with Slovenia being a young member, I would like to say the following. The effect of joining the European Union is transformative. We have changed. Membership in the European Union changes the country, it changes people's views first, and then people ensure that politics also changes. It cannot be otherwise. Counting on political structures changing by themselves is illusory and does not yield results. We must work... As European citizens, we must work to convince our fellow citizens from the Western Balkans that their only place is in Europe. And then they will also ensure a change in the political structures, so that the political structures will accept this fact as something they must fight for. And then they will also accept the rule of law and democracy. I myself do not believe in the reverse order. That is why in Slovenia we strongly support all political structures so that this process in Bosnia and Herzegovina really moves into a higher gear and that we give Bosnia, and above all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the opportunity to become equal European citizens. Just for the sake of it. Slovenia is a proud member of the European family and it gives us great pleasure that we will be able to build a European future together, not only with the existing members of the European Union, but with the whole of Europe. And we believe that this is the path that will actually lead not only to peace, but also to prosperity for all citizens, all people of Europe. Forward, Europe!
[EN] Paulo | Rangel said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group . – Madam President, dear Prime Minister Golob: let me warmly welcome you in such a bitter moment for this Parliament. Slovenia was the first country of former Yugoslavia to join the European Union. This stands, and should stand, as an example and a role model for the Western Balkans. And I must congratulate Slovenia on its great integration process that you have just described as a great example for the whole region and for all Europe. Secondly, congratulations on your new president, the first female president, despite she is not from our political family. This is always a very positive and progressive step towards equality, and that should be here naturally, point of order. We have all have some concerns, including on rule of law, which we must share and which is also the point of these debates. First, Slovenia itself has suffered from internal border checks before. But now we hear that you may consider introducing internal border checks of your own after Croatia joins Schengen. This would send the worst possible signals, especially after the council rejected the accession of Romania and Bulgaria. If it happens, the European Parliament will be ready to scrutinise any individual violation of our freedom of movement in Slovenia or elsewhere in Europe. Second, there are some concerns regarding the rule of law. We are paying close attention to the changing of laws ruling the media landscape in Slovenia, in a rather unusual and urgent procedure. And let me tell you that the resignation of the interior minister after allegations of political pressure regarding the police is also troubling. We have so often criticised recent developments in Spain or even in my own country regarding concentration of the power of police. I have to mention this case here as well. Does this not trigger a rule-of-law alert when we speak about interference in police commands? Finally, Slovenia is an example in the support to Ukraine in the current war in humanitarian, financial and military aid, as you have pointed out. However, it is concerning that the Members of a European Parliament that support your government did not support the resolution of this House recognising Russia as a regime sponsor of terrorism. How do you assess this reluctance to support Ukraine in all possible ways? Your fellow Slovene Slavoj Žižek, famously satirised the geographical divisions in Europe by pointing out what separates the Balkans from Mitteleuropa . But those divisions must be behind us. The Sava or the Danube do not separate us. Just like that, the Dnipro does not divide Ukrainians. Europe is large enough for us all. Europe is more than a continent; it is an idea. And it is also an idea in Slovene and loved by the Slovenians. Even though today we meet in Strasbourg, let me recall a small piece of Brussels: near the Schuman roundabout, not too far from the European Parliament stands a memorial with the first line of your national anthem, Žive naj vsi narodi . God’s blessing on all nations. In this difficult winter, in these difficult times, let these words, these Slovenian words, this anthem by the great France Prešeren echo throughout Europe. May all our nations thrive, žive naj vsi narodi .
[EN] Milan | Brglez said from the S-D that on behalf of the S&D Group. – Madam Chair, thank you for the floor, Chair. Honourable Prime Minister, Commissioner, colleagues. This is Europe. I am pleased that Slovenia and the government of Dr. Robert Golob are demonstrating, through this debate and their engagement on the European stage, that Slovenia is part of core Europe and the efforts for a more integrated and more solidary European Union. For the European Union at the service of the people. A sincere commitment to these values ​​is best demonstrated in times of great trials, in the aftermath of the pandemic, the war on our doorstep and the energy crisis. Slovenia has actively engaged in the search for a common European solution to the energy crisis, where as a small country it understands all too well that the solution can only be a common, solidary and European one. Honourable Prime Minister, from this position I would like to encourage you to continue these efforts and for Slovenia to join additional measures at home and at the European level to reduce household costs and help small and medium-sized enterprises. At the same time, the burden of solidarity must be transferred from the most vulnerable in this crisis to all sectors, from energy, pharmaceutical companies to the banking sector, which have benefited greatly from this and previous crises. I am convinced that together we can do it, and that we can also show the countries waiting to join the Union that we are on their side and how we are. In the serious situation in the Balkans and the war in Ukraine, our message must be clear. Europe and therefore the European Union is and will be the homeland of all who want to live in it in democracy, freedom and peace?
[EN] Stéphane | Séjourné said from the Renew that on behalf of the Renew group. – Madam President, Prime Minister, dear colleagues, since May, Slovenia has impressed with its new European commitment. It has also become a model to follow, including in integration, as you said, Prime Minister. We are proud to count you in our political family at Renew. Ecological transformation and new economic attractiveness are at the heart of your action and your government, fully aligned with European climate and sovereignty objectives. You have, in a way, put Slovenia back at the heart of the European Union. Your institutional record is unanimously praised by civil society and civil rights organizations. Illiberal and authoritarian excesses have finally ceased in Slovenia. Public television is becoming independent again. The courts can rule in a much calmer climate, since these few months of governance. The Slovenians, vote after vote, have confirmed that the populist experiment of your predecessor, Janez Janša, was a political, societal and economic failure. Mr Rangel, what you have just said in your statements does not surprise me. It is, moreover, in line with the few slanders that the EPP has been able to utter about Slovenia since the defeat in May. Your EPP MEPs, although officially pro-European, have in fact often supported and excused all of Mr Janša's insults on social networks against us partners and parliamentarians – we have benefited quite extensively from this. You also insinuated that the election was under foreign influence. During this election, you also defended the harassment of a number of journalists, who were particularly vilified by the current government. Mr Prime Minister, I would just like, on behalf of my group, to assure you of the support of the vast majority of parliamentarians here for your determination to support and encourage calm democratic debate in your country. My group and many others hope that Slovenia will be at the heart of Europe and that the path chosen by the Slovenes will inspire other peoples – I am thinking in particular of the Poles and Hungarians. Thank you for your intervention. You will always have the support of Renew Europe.
[EN] Philippe | Lamberts said from the Verts/ALE that on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group . – Madam President, welcome to the European Parliament, Prime Minister. It’s good to hear sincere words of, I would say, a decent person who is in politics. We have at least two things in common. I started my career in the private sector as well for 22 years, and what made me enter politics was the fact that in my municipality, the same party, held a majority, an absolute majority for 65 years, they considered power as their property. And this is why I said, well, I need to step in because a former prime minister in Belgium once said, you know, in politics, once all the disgusted people will have left, only the disgusting ones will remain. And so we don’t want this to happen. So welcome. And it’s such a relief to see Slovenia under your leadership stopping the slippery slope and reversing the slippery slope on which it was. We are witnessing within the European Union enough of trampling on the rule of law and European values not to see it happen in one more Member State. And that was exactly what was happening in Slovenia. So for all this, thank you. I am really happy that you are there. I have also been touched by the fact that you have been tearing down fences. You know, asylum and migration are serious challenges, but you understand that indeed it is beyond the capabilities of any single Member State to find a solution, certainly not with barbed wire, and that we need a common response to that in solidarity with each other. And again, for that, thank you. Now, you said a lot about energy and about the green transition. And of course, there is a lot with which we agree. You are remarkable because you are the first head of government that I hear asserting that there is speculation on the energy market. You know, when I engage with the Commission on that, their answer is no, no, no, no. the price reflects market fundamentals and only market fundamentals. And yes, we have to go after that. I totally agree with that. No. Is the price cap the best way? Well, maybe there are other financial regulation instruments like position limits and curbing the entry into market of some players that we need to activate. And there we are totally your allies on this. Now, on the green transition, I know that you feel that this is absolutely crucial to our future. You do not present that just as a defensive thing, but also an ambitious thing. And I agree with that. But I might have some questions for you because, well, my friends in Slovenia tell me, for instance, that the red tape to install solar panels on roofs in a country where basically most people have their own house, that all these red tape has not been cut yet. Also that you want to prolong the extinction of this fossil-based power plant, three more years until 2033. And then there’s the issue of nuclear. Now we can have a debate about nuclear energy. But again, this is presented in Slovenia as the silver bullet that will solve all problems in energy. Really? I mean, if the business case for nuclear is so good, it shouldn’t be afraid of a fair and square competition in the public debate with other forms of energy. And indeed, you mentioned renewables, and there we would like a more balanced public debate on that. Another thing that you didn’t mention, but where Slovenia is strong, I think your country is probably the European champion of biodiversity. I understand that, per capita, your country has the most beekeepers in Europe. So I don’t understand why Slovenia is not more proactive in supporting the sustainable use of pesticides regulation, because you know that there is a lot of resistance and we need support, including in the Council, not just in the Parliament, to make it happen. So, Prime Minister, a lot to agree with. Frankly, we want to work with you and well, let us hope that indeed what you are doing in Slovenia is not just a parenthesis, but the beginning of a new future. So I’m glad to work with you.
[EN] France | Jamet said from the ID that on behalf of the ID group. – Madam President, one in three French people forgoing medical care, a collapsing, crushed and downgraded middle class, increasingly severe precariousness affecting more than 11 million of my compatriots, our relocated businesses, social dumping institutionalized by posted workers, a reform of retirement at 65 imposed by Brussels, a dizzying rise in bankruptcies of our SMEs, our micro-enterprises and our artisans, accelerated by the energy crisis, a farmer commits suicide every two days, our fishermen sacrificed, French people in the dark and cold this winter, after the sabotage of our nuclear industry, in which we had been able to invest, which was sacrificed by Brussels and which ensured our energy independence, double-digit inflation, a climate of recession in a context of savagery and mass immigration: this is the Europe in which my compatriots live. Mr. Séjourné, this is your Europe, that of Brussels, of technocracy, and of globalism. This is your Europe, we leave it to you! Our Europe is the genius of the people, colleagues. It is the place where nations emerged that have allowed us, through emulation, diversity, and progress, to shine throughout the world over the centuries. This is the Europe that we defend and cherish, particularly with economic patriotism and respect for the sovereignty of nations. As you will have understood, our Europe is not your European Union. They are not only fundamentally opposed, but also irreconcilable. But rest assured, it is our Europe that will survive you.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you very much, Ms Jamet. It is truly a pity, however, when you have a Prime Minister of a country that you could engage with that you don’t use this opportunity to do exactly that.
[EN] Ladislav | Ilčić said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR club. – Honorable Chairperson, Honorable Prime Minister. Croatia and Slovenia are neighboring and very friendly countries. I hope that the Slovenians will cheer for Croatia tonight in the semi-finals of the World Cup. But I have a few questions. The first is related to a topic that you did not touch on in your introductory presentation, which is the issue of security and the rule of law in the context of illegal migration. In these years, the European Union is at a turning point in which there are those within the European Union who advocate a responsible approach, a firm guarding of the borders, which at the same time gives a message to migrants that they do not even try to cross the border illegally because they will not succeed, so migrants avoid such things and we have much fewer humanitarian disasters, and we also have those who advocate the so-called a soft approach in which they send a message to migrants: just come, one way or another, you will manage to cross that border. In fact, they're not only sending that message, they're saying not only is it possible to cross the border illegally, but we're going to help you do it. Well, recently we have also had an indicator, such as the Ocean Viking ship in Italy, that there is active cooperation between these NGOs and people smugglers. I am curious about your position? Will you support Croatia in responsibly guarding the external borders of Schengen and what will be Slovenia's contribution to guarding the common external border, especially in the context that has already been mentioned – the recent resignation of your Minister of the Interior Tatjana Bobnar. Can we expect efficiency and stability from your government on this issue? Another question. You have talked a lot about energy and the lack of energy. I think it is more or less clear that this lack has existed even before the Russian aggression on Ukraine. So, we have an approach in the European Parliament that is called green and that is called ambitious, although it is not, it is very often unrealistic, unreasonable and even counterproductive that goes exclusively for bans. They would ban coal, they would ban gas, they would ban nuclear (the word is indistinct), and then they would promote heat pumps, but they would ban fluorinated F-gases in pumps and so on, right. You have invested a huge amount of money, 500 million euros, in the recapitalization of the Holding, in which it is not exactly clear what you will support. I would be interested in that too. The holding also includes the Thermal Power Plant Šoštanj and the Nuclear Power Plant Krško, and I am very interested in what will happen to Krško. Of course, there is joint ownership between Croatia and Slovenia. I am interested in how you see this transition? Of course we need a green transition, we just need to see how realistic it is, at what pace it can go, and I am interested in how you see Croatia's involvement in new projects in Krško?
[EN] Marc | Botenga said from the The Left that on behalf of the group The Left. – Madam President, Mr Prime Minister, welcome to a CEO, a business boss who directly becomes Prime Minister. This is obviously something! Therefore, I am going to address with you an element that was absent from your intervention, and that is the question of social dumping. What is the concept of social dumping? As for our employees, we are going to work, we are going to do this – we are going to send you an email, via detaching, temporary agent, we don't have to do it – you don't need to know what to do with your words. This applies to all Germans in the United States and “verkeer verkeer van diensten” noemt. And this social dumping, today, occurs in particular through differences in social contributions and gross salary. Social security contributions are then paid in the country where the contract was signed, rather than in the country where the work is carried out. Your bedrijven is dat vaak interesting, want zij krijgen veel hogere winsten en ze betalen lagere socialezekerheidsbijdragen. Your workers are dat een drama. Het Borealis-schandaal in Antwerpen toont dat dit ook steeds vaker gaat over niet-Europese werknemers, werkkrachten die schaamteloos uitgebuit, die dan via Hongarije naar Portugal worden gestures om in Antwerpen of Belgium terecht te komen. There is social dumping, as you know, in different sectors: transport, construction… Far too many sectors. In the United States, there is a large roll in the European Union and the Indian Federation of Slovenia. Misschien gebeurt dat onder druk van grotere landen of andere landen die de Sloveense regering daartoe aanzetten, maar toch. I looked at the numbers. Nearly a third of construction workers in Slovenia are sent abroad, the highest percentage in the European Union. Six out of ten workers posted from Slovenia are nationals of non-European countries, or at least non-members of the European Union. That is, companies established in Slovenia are looking for workers abroad, not because they need them, but to immediately send them to other Member States, exploit them thoroughly and make more profit, quite simply – and in the process, destroy labor law. This system exempts €128 million in social security contributions. This is a real hold-up on social security, let's be honest, and we're still only talking about one country. Ik was in your country, in Slovenië, ongeveer een jaar geleden, under the vorige regering. Ik had daar een ontmoeting met Sloveense vakbonden en zij toonden mij iets dat mij serieus geschokt heeft. In een gebouw van een ministry – hetzelfde gebouw als een ministry – had je een lijst met postbusbedrijven. When I had to go to the postbus hebt met a little bit of information on the official website, but I don't know what we're doing, but our elders have their activities. Dus in het gebouw van een ministry! So, Mr Prime Minister, social dumping, whether through secondment or subcontracting, is a problem today in Europe. The solutions exist, we know it. This includes making the free movement of services conditional on guarantees on working conditions, the principle of "equal pay for equal work", the refusal of any discrimination between employees based on where the contract was signed, and, I am also thinking of the development of a European directive on limiting subcontracting chains, which only serve social dumping. So, a question, Mr. Prime Minister: what will your government do to change the fundamental role that Slovenia plays in social dumping?
[EN] Mislav | Kolakušić said from the NI that – Dear Chairwoman, dear colleagues, dear Prime Minister of our neighboring and friendly Republic of Slovenia, in the name of our friendship, I would like to ask you two things: one, to give us some advice - how did you manage to produce 45 million vehicles at Revoz... Four and a half million, I apologize. You produce 45 vehicles per hour. And we in the Republic of Croatia, with billions of public money, managed to produce only a few pieces. I sincerely ask you for that advice. Second! I ask you, like all citizens of the European Union, colleagues, to cheer for Croatia tonight. Let's have the European Union final on Sunday and let's finally all celebrate a little together and may the better team win. Long live the European Union, long live us.
[EN] Romana | Tomc said from the PPE that – Madam President, esteemed Prime Minister Dr. Robert Golob. I listened with interest to your speech, where you highlighted the energy crisis, the green transition and the enlargement of the European Union to the Balkans. I am pleased that you have proposals on how to tackle all these challenges. I would be even happier if you also had solutions for Slovenia, where the situation is truly worrying. In addition to issues related to the increasing cost of living, the rule of law and freedom of the media are also at risk. Thousands of people in Slovenia have been left without a doctor in just six months of your government. Personnel purges are underway, citizens are paying one of the highest electricity prices in Europe. They are worried about how they will survive the winter with high inflation. The economy warns that your measures are too slow, too complicated and not effective enough. A few days ago, as already mentioned, your Minister of the Interior resigned and accused you of directly interfering with the police because you allegedly personally demanded the dismissal of certain people. You lied to MPs in the national parliament. Your past and present role in relation to energy deals is full of unanswered questions. The Speaker of Parliament, your close party companion, breaks the rules and determines what elected representatives can and cannot ask, and compares leading police officers to Eichmann. Journalists who uncover scandals and the inefficiency of your government are subjected to threats and pressure on a daily basis. It is clear that you use very autocratic methods in your leadership. Yesterday, one of the co-founders resigned from your party because of this, as did one of the women who disagreed with your policies, and it is becoming increasingly clear that you are trying to establish complete power in all institutions and at the same time silence those few smaller media outlets that are critical of you. Unfortunately, your actions at home in Slovenia do not reflect what you say. However, much information about the slippages of your government is difficult to reach the public, as you are protected by the mainstream media and political activists. What you are doing is far from democracy. This is not in line with European values. All of this will be felt most by the citizens of Slovenia, but the destruction of democracy and brutal interference in the media space should also concern European institutions. If I return to your speech, then of course we would most like everything you said to the European public to be implemented in Slovenia. However, words are not enough, people expect measures that will provide them with effective healthcare and help in dealing with high prices. Instead, they have received higher taxes. They expect you to establish an environment that is a place for freedom of the media and thought. The economy expects measures immediately, not next winter. And we all expect you to respect the rule of law and renounce the destruction of democracy and the establishment of an authoritarian system in Slovenia.
[EN] Matjaž | Nemec said from the S-D that – Madam Chair, esteemed Prime Minister of the Republic of Slovenia, Dr. Robert Golob, esteemed fellow countryman, welcome to Strasbourg, welcome to the European Parliament and welcome among us. It is nice to hear the Slovenian voice here. I thank you for your great commitment to granting candidate status to Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as possible. I believe that the efforts of Slovenian politics in this direction are crucial and, including the efforts of the President of the Republic, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and us in the European Parliament, have borne the first fruits. At my initiative, we, the MEPs, also sent a letter to the President of the European Parliament, Roberto Metsola, in June, calling on the European Parliament to also advocate for granting candidate status to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Considering today's times and the terrible war in Europe, this is an extremely important, if not decisive, step for the entire Western Balkans region, for a region that often lacks the momentum and strength to move closer to the European Union. And for a region to which the European Union promised a European perspective almost twenty years ago in Thessaloniki, but we are still very far from a new enlargement. Not only between Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also with the other countries of the Western Balkans, there are strong ties. Slovenia is and remains an ally of the countries in the region – without conditions, without insidious games, without harmful interests. Today, two days before the December meeting, when the country also has the green light from the Commission, I call on European leaders to also give the green light at the European Council. Let a clear voice be heard – the European Union is de facto living its mission of a united and connected Europe, of which the Western Balkans region must become an equal partner. Therefore, I ask you, the esteemed Prime Minister of the Republic of Slovenia, Dr. Robert Golob, how do you assess the possibility of a positive decision for Bosnia and Herzegovina at the weekend? Which country is the toughest nut to crack and is a compromise still possible and what message does the EU want to send ... to the countries in the region?
[EN] Katalin | Cseh said from the Renew that – Mr President, dear Prime Minister Golob, dear colleagues, thank you very much, Prime Minister, for addressing this Chamber today and sharing your vision for the future of Europe, a vision that I was so pleased to hear in this Chamber. Protecting our European values, standing up for the rule of law, facing the climate emergency with courage and ambition: our group, Renew Europe, is wholeheartedly behind you in the fight for these issues. It’s so important. But also, as a representative of the Hungarian Momentum Movement – the youngest opposition party fighting Viktor Orbán’s illiberal populism – I also wanted to talk briefly about what I believe this year’s election in Slovenia means for us and also for Europe as a whole. The government of former Prime Minister Janez Janša alarmed Europe, and rightfully so. It has shown that no country is immune to democratic backsliding. Mr Janša issued ad hominem attacks at Members of this Parliament and against members of our group in particular. At home he attacked civil liberties and undermined judicial independence. Media freedom was very severely curtailed as Hungarian media tycoons showed up in Slovenia, interfering with press freedom and exporting the Orbán model. So in short, what we saw is the Orbanisation of Slovenia. The playbook was just so remarkably similar. And this is why the election victory of the Freedom Movement has such a broad Europe-wide importance. First and foremost, it gave us hope – hope that the global democratic backsliding trend can be stopped and it can be reversed, that the values of liberal democracy and environmentalism can prevail against illiberal populism, also electorally. But, colleagues, the steady erosion of our European values and the trend of democratic backsliding did not stop. And we also still hear talking points of one of the autocrats echoed by major political groups in this House. There is so much work to be done for the European Union as a whole to defend our values. So I believe that the new government in Slovenia has a very deep understanding, but also strong credibility to stand up for European values. One key priority must be media freedom and a strong EU-wide regulation for media markets. We are looking forward to your leadership on these issues, Prime Minister.
[EN] Thomas | Waitz said from the Verts/ALE that – Mr President, dear Commissioner, dear Prime Minister Robert Golob. First, a short comment to our Conservative colleagues. Geographically, Slovenia is an Alpine republic, and the former speaker from your party, it was your government leaving a devastated health care system to your successor. So don’t blame the new government for your failures. But now, coming to my actual speech, thank you so much for coming to the European Parliament and congrats once again for securing a progressive, a pro-European, a liberal-democracy-oriented majority in my so dear to my heart neighbouring and also partly living country, Slovenia. Thank you so much for that. And also I want to personally thank you for your strong support for the integration of Western Balkan countries towards European Union. It’s very important to have you as one of the pillars of further negotiations. We need to accelerate. We need to keep our promises. It’s important for the citizens, but it’s also important in terms of security, economy and environment. So thank you very much for that. Indeed, I also have a critical question that I would like to ask you, and this is especially towards you as an energy expert. You know that nuclear energy takes a long time to be built. You know that it is causing harm to environment. You know that  Krško is built on an earthquake line, on a geological instable region. And you know that renewable energy is much cheaper and much more effective than nuclear energy. Please explain to us why do you want to build the second block, while Slovenia has all the options on the table to go for solar? And please also tell us how you will enable households to also deliver electricity to the system and not just supply themselves.
[EN] Joachim Stanisław | Brudziński said from the ECR that Mr. President! Mr. Prime Minister! I would like to thank you for these words addressed to us in this chamber. It is extremely important that the voices of representatives of Central and Eastern European countries be present and audible in the debate on the future of Europe in the European Parliament. Too often, unfortunately, we have felt and heard from representatives of the so-called "old" EU that countries like Slovenia, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and finally my country, Poland, are allowed less because our democracies are supposedly immature. In contrast to the supposedly mature democracies of countries like Germany, France, or the Netherlands. The war in Ukraine today demonstrates the consequences of such a policy. The voices of Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and other countries that have historically experienced the benefits of Russia, whether Tsarist Russia, Bolshevik Russia, or, in recent years, Putin's Russia, were not listened to. And fortunately, today, representatives of EU institutions can also hear: it's a shame we didn't listen to Poland. Mr. Prime Minister, there were threads in your speech with which I completely agree. I'm thinking here, for example, about the Western Balkan countries' presence in the European Union. It's obvious that if they turned their backs on Bosnia and Herzegovina, that country will sooner or later fall under the influence of Russia, and even Saudi Wahhabis. But please allow me to remain skeptical of some of the theses you've expressed here. I don't personally believe that vegetarianism or a new secular religion, in terms of climate change, is the path to universal human happiness. Unfortunately, during your speech, some of the previous speakers uttered hypocritical words. You're from our political family, so you're law-abiding and worthy of our full support. If you're not from that family, you're a threat to the rule of law and democracy. And you know, it's always darkest under the streetlight, as the recent scandal involving the Vice-President of the European Parliament demonstrates.
[EN] Carles | Puigdemont i Casamajó said from the NI that – Mr President, Prime Minister, thank you for your inspiring vision on energy, food, freedom, for what it represents for Europe. Slovenia has made an extraordinary journey since it became an independent state, and especially since it joined the European Union. Today it is a model in many ways, and I believe it can help the Union as a whole at a time of very high risks which have been aggravated by the Russian aggression against Ukraine. Slovenia can help make people understand that Europe’s strength lies in the diversity of its people, and that the more diverse we are, the more efficient we are; that we can ensure the well—being of citizens in a more effective and sustainable way; and that we can better ensure fundamental rights. Respect for this diversity is the key of the future of the Union, and in this sense Slovenia, as you mentioned, has a very important role to play.
[EN] Seán | Kelly said from the PPE that – A Uachtaráin , thank you, Prime Minister, for joining us today to share your views on the future of Europe. I welcome you to this timely debate. We are currently at a critical juncture for Europe and for European democracy, facing significant challenges both internally and externally. Looking internally, events within the European Parliament over the recent days have shaken our trust in our institution. Allegations that have come to light of possible corruption cases involving MEPs and Parliament staff are deeply troubling. There is no place for corruption in European democracy, and these developments will warrant a period of deep reflection and reform. Beyond our plenary Chamber we are facing unprecedented challenges in Europe. War in Ukraine and the ensuing energy and cost—of—living crisis pose new tests for the EU and call for further cooperation between Member States. As citizens and businesses worry this Christmas about keeping the lights and heating on, we must ensure that the EU continues to deliver for its citizens. Unity is more important than ever. As leader of a small European Member State I am confident that you understand this, Prime Minister. Ireland and Slovenia are alike in this regard. As small Member States we share a common understanding that together we are stronger than apart. Indeed, Slovenia joined the European Union during Ireland’s Council Presidency in 2004. Having witnessed the enormous benefits that European Union membership has delivered for my country in terms of economic, social and cultural opportunities, it was a pleasure to hear that Ireland played this small role in Slovenia’s journey. Looking forward, the shared challenges we now face are significant: no single country can handle these alone. There is huge strength in unity and I hope to continue to see Slovenia and Ireland grow together within the EU.
[EN] Miapetra | Kumpula-Natri said from the S-D that – Mr President, and welcome to the European Parliament. I appreciate this opportunity to have a dialogue and I saw you spoke from your heart. We all know the greetings of the past government, Janša’s government, and we are so happy that only in 5 months and 12 days you have delivered. Not everything can be changed, but you see the government building the common Europe and showing that the small country can play an active role on the way forward on the transition that is so important even in the time of the crisis. Your greetings on the energy systems I could not agree with more. It needs to be a clean transition and we need to get rid of the speculators on the markets. And this day, when the people are seeing the prices of energy, also your government will put a lot of help for their citizens. Dear colleagues, I think what we heard today also on the importance of rule of law, it may not be unanswered that we can send greetings to the Slovenian Parliament. Thank you for giving same—sex marriage rights also to citizens in Slovenia, as we have worked here for the rule of law, it is important the national government is doing the very same thing.
[EN] Irena | Joveva said from the Renew that – Madam President, esteemed Prime Minister, esteemed colleagues, the European Union has grown from a peace political project into a true political community in seven decades. Together, we set global standards for people in climate policy, digital rights, healthy food, democratic values. Is everything perfect? ​​It is not. During this political evolution, an overly complex bureaucratic apparatus has also grown, which has difficulty adapting to the constant new challenges or crises of our time. We have made great strides in recent years. That is of course true. The already mentioned climate policy, specifically the Recovery and Resilience Fund. Great, but where are we today? In the current situation brought to us by the criminal war in Ukraine and the energy crisis, despite all the efforts and achievements, I miss more ambition at the Union level, including in other areas. I would also like unity in joint responses to mitigate this crisis and a common framework for the necessary investments for a green Europe that is energy independent of all authoritarian states. RePowerEU, joint gas purchases, electricity price caps are a good idea and in these days, when we are discussing the US anti-inflation act, which is unfair to the European Union, we should also find the political will for a European response, for example the establishment of a new flexible fund to deal with crises. The veto in the Council forces into unacceptable compromises. Corruption at a systemic level in the Member States, not to mention the obviously individual ones, even here in this House – this eats into our credibility. This is also why, and above all to enable flexibility by expanding the fiscal capacity of the Union, institutional reforms are necessary, by opening up the fundamental treaties, abolishing unanimity, democratising our processes and establishing a real European public discourse. This is precisely why such agreements and discussions are important and so substantive, if I may exclude some... (the speaker runs out of time to speak)
[EN] Mikuláš | Peksa said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, dear Prime Minister Golob, last year I had the opportunity to visit Slovenia on a mission as a member of the Budgetary Control Committee. Under your predecessor Janez Janša, Slovenia was suffering multiple rule of law crises. The issue that resonated with me mostly was the intimidation of the controlling authorities, as well as the lack of media freedom. Budgets were cut and critical investigative journalists were victims of organised attacks. And of course, we can’t forget his efforts to politicise your radio broadcasts at Radiotelevizija Slovenija. But you are the head of a new government and I hear that the situation has improved already. And your legislative initiative to restructure the governing bodies of Radiotelevizija Slovenija is a welcome one. I hope that that will indeed lead to a less hostile public media landscape. However, it appears that there are some branches of the government where the political influence is still creeping back in. So recently we have witnessed your Interior Minister resigned over the ... (The President cut off the speaker)
[EN] Laura | Huhtasaari said from the ID that – Mr President, Europe is in a serious crisis. Even the war in Ukraine will not stop the greening Democrats and the red green right from implementing indecisive decisions. Why can't emissions trading be frozen? That would be a great way to lower the price of electricity. Finland drove down the use of peat with a frenzy and is now whining when district heating is expensive. Do you want electricity to be expensive or cheap? If you want it to be cheap, isn't it time to change the concept? Green fanaticism has spread everywhere. The journalists in the mainstream media are mostly green, and that's why most of the media's turnover comes from lying. The green parties decided that trees will not grow after 2030. And this madness doesn't end there. Today, we are also told as a fact that there are 72 genders and other nonsense. In the EU, we don't hear any defense speeches on behalf of persecuted Christians, even though Christians are the most persecuted group in the world. I am worried about the West. It is in danger of sinking.
[EN] Nicolas | Bay said from the NI that – Madam President, Prime Minister, some of our colleagues are not with us this morning because they are sleeping in prison. Civil servants and, above all, several MEPs are suspected of corruption and of having received money from Qatar to influence European Union policy. All come from the ranks of the moral left. All are actors or intermediaries of these NGOs that claim to dictate what is good and just to legitimately elected people and governments. As a MEP for eight years, I have endured, session after session, report after report, their lessons. I have seen them adorn themselves with every virtue, pose as great defenders of human rights, and we learn, therefore, that those who claimed to hunt down homophobes in the four corners of Europe have received bags of money from the most homophobic state in the world. Yes, this hypocrisy, this duplicity might raise a smile, but this corruption affair forces us to ask ourselves: how many interventions have been controlled by Qatari money? How many texts voted on here, in this chamber, just last month, by all the elected members of the Socialist group, served the interests of this Islamist country? When a European campaign promotes the veil, is it an initiative from Brussels or Doha? Let us put an end to naivety and weakness in the face of the Islamic offensive in Europe. Let us affirm our values of civilization in the face of this high treason.
[EN] Bogusław | Liberadzki said from the S-D that – Madam President, Prime Minister, let me say that I am totally with you, and welcome back on the right track. You said we must be decisive: unity and more – I understood – power and European methodology, and I am totally with you. Renewable energy is own resources using waste, biomass, sun, wind, new jobs, cheaper energy and energy independence. Rule of law: I come from Poland. I am totally with you. The rule of law is not to be negotiated; it is to be enforced. And thank you for your words concerning Ukraine. Supporting Ukraine means we are preserving our freedom and peace. And at the end, I am keeping my fingers crossed for your game against Argentina tonight.
[EN] Clara | Ponsatí Obiols said from the NI that – Madam President, Minister, in 1991 US Secretary of State James Baker solemnly declared that neither the United States not the European Community would ever recognise an independent Slovenia. Less than a year later, both were among the first to recognise the new country. The lesson is simple: self-determination must be pursued regardless of the opposition of world powers, that always will protect the status quo. This also means that states only recognise the exercise of these rights when it suits them geopolitically, or when they think that rejecting it causes more trouble than accepting it. And that’s why it often becomes a mess and a source of instability. The EU should change in stance on self-determination and grant a safe and clear path for minorities to exercise it within the Union and for viewing it with the rest of the world. Slovenia should lead the effort to redefine this right. And we Catalans will help you in this endeavour.
[EN] Robert | Hajšel said from the S-D that – Madam President, Slovakia is certainly an inspiring example for all the countries of the Western Balkans that want to become members of the European Union, how to proceed on this path and what reforms need to be implemented. It is good that you are devoting so much energy to this region. It is also close to my country and to me personally, because I am Slovak. The Russian invasion of Ukraine and the changes in the current geopolitical situation have made us realise that the strategic interest of the European Union is a stable and secure environment in its immediate neighbourhood, regardless of which of these countries will eventually become a Member State of the European Union or not. The Western Balkans have been waiting in the waiting room for membership of the European Union for a long time, whether it is Serbia, Montenegro or other countries. But today, in the current situation and as a result of the Tirana summit, there is a certain change in the perception of the whole process, and the frustration of these countries is changing into sober and even cautious optimism. And the European Union is also recovering from a kind of enlargement fatigue and is determined to really take these countries seriously. It would be good for us to continue doing that, and we need to help each other do that.
[EN] Elena | Yoncheva said from the S-D that – Madam President, Mr. Golob, we are honored to be in this room today and to have the opportunity to lead this debate. Only a year ago, Slovenia had embarked on a destructive path, and the Prime Minister at the time controlled the media and the judiciary with great arrogance. I am pleased to see that Slovenia has very quickly shaken off this pattern. I congratulate you on undertaking decisive reforms to ensure that the country's media will be free from political interference. What you have done to restore media freedom is an inspiration to the whole of Europe. Mr. Golob, thank you for putting Slovenia back at the heart of the European Union and, above all, for proving that the countries of Southeastern Europe can propose reforms that inspire the whole of the European Union.
[EN] Robert | Golob said from the NULL that Prime Minister of Slovenia . – Madam President, dear Members of the Parliament, I’m glad to be here again now. I have a bigger audience now. You obviously enjoyed my previous speech so much, you came to listen, all of you. Let me reiterate certain things that are so important that I don’t want you to miss. First, let me pledge our full, not just support, but commitment to implementation of the rule of law in Slovenia, but also our support for the rule of law within the other Member States of the European Union. And the rule of law is not subject to interpretation by political partisans. It is something that you either have or you don’t. Because it’s not just a political system. It is our responsibility to implement, but it’s being lived by other subsystems such as the media, the judicial system and so forth. The other commitment that I would like to pledge fully is our commitment to support the Ukrainian people. We’ve done everything possible and everything that we could or even did not plan to do under the previous government. We are supporting Ukraine in all possible ways, and we do it promptly. We are not just promising aid; we are delivering aid promptly. And that’s something that’s easy, very easy to prove. We are also very committed to supporting the enlargement of the European Union in the Western Balkans. This is one of the first topics on our government agenda when it comes to foreign policy. We want to see the region stable and the only way to stabilise the region is by bringing it closer to integrate it into the European Union. It’s not a matter of which mechanism is being used. It’s about integration, and as fast as possible and as strong as possible. That’s the only way we can transform the region at its core. And third, we come to energy. I believe that no single nation can face the energy crisis alone. It doesn’t matter how big you are. It doesn’t matter how rich you are. The cost you will pay if you want to tackle it alone is going to be exorbitant and you will not be able to take it. Maybe for a year, yes, but not in the longer run. The only way forward is through a united and coordinated effort. And for this particular reason I urge again, not just you, but my colleagues: forget about national egotistical moves, thinking that you can solve your problems and leave the others behind. It’s not doable. The only way forward is by being united and decisive. It is truly the only way forward. And that is also the only possible message that the speculative traders who are ruling the energy markets of Europe right now will understand. And let’s leave the floor with that.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Thank you very much Prime Minister. That concludes the debate. (The sitting was suspended briefly.)
