[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that Dear colleagues, we have the President of Romania, Klaus Iohannis, with us today. Dear President, dear Klaus, welcome to the European Parliament. Thank you for accepting our invitation to address this House as part of our ‘This is Europe’ series of debates. Seventeen years of European Union membership have been transformative for Romania and for Europe. It has given new impetus for businesses, for industry, for science and academia. It has brought reforms and social benefits. It has brought opportunities for people and levelled up communities. EU membership has meant protection for people’s rights, for social justice and the rule of law. And in times of geo-political change, these European values must be defended. Dear President, I would like to particularly thank you for your country’s unwavering support for Ukraine and for the Republic of Moldova – particularly now that EU accession negotiations have begun. Thank you to Romania for always being the champion the people of those nations needed. Romania has a special place in my heart. It is a country that has embraced what it means to be European. At the height of the pandemic, Romanian doctors flew to hospitals in other Member States to help. When we faced devastating natural disasters, Romanian firefighters left their country to run into the flames. In the first days of the brutal Russian invasion of Ukraine, Romanian families rushed to the border to comfort those fleeing. Mulțumesc pentru tot România! Mr President, yours is a country that has shown how to overcome challenges and how to lead. Europe is stronger thanks to Romania, thanks to your reinforcement of the EU’s eastern flank. And we will be stronger still when you finally take your rightful place in the Schengen area, and join the eurozone in the future. And you will find this House on your side on that journey. (Applause) Last word: on 9 June, over 19 million Romanians will be called upon to choose the 33 Members of the European Parliament elected to represent them. We must work together to make sure people understand why they must vote, why it is important. Their voice matters for the European Union and Romania’s future, and we must keep listening and keep delivering. Dear President, Dear Klaus, the floor is yours.
[RO] Klaus | Iohannis said from the NULL that President of Romania . – Doamnă președintă a Parlamentului European, distinși membri ai Parlamentului European, doamnelor și domnilor, este o onoare pentru mine să mă aflu astăzi în fața dumneavoastră. Vă mulțumesc, doamnă președintă Metsola, pentru că mi-ați oferit ocazia de a reveni în centrul democrației europene la începutul unui an crucial pentru viitorul Uniunii Europene. Ca și în urmă cu cinci ani, când m-am adresat plenului Parlamentului European, vreau să reafirm încrederea mea și a poporului român în valoarea acțiunii europene unite și solidare, în puterea incontestabilă a unei singure Europe. Efectele pandemiei, războiul de agresiune al Rusiei împotriva Ucrainei, conflictul din Orientul Mijlociu, toate acestea sunt numai câteva dintre evoluțiile dramatice care ne-au testat în ultimii ani nu doar capacitatea de răspuns, ci și atașamentul nostru sincer față de Uniune și față de valorile și principiile care ne țin împreună. Doamnelor și domnilor, țara mea este probabil unul dintre cele mai bune exemple ale puterii transformatoare a Uniunii Europene. Aderarea ne-a adus beneficii indiscutabile și dintre cele mai concrete. Fondurile europene intrate în România de la momentul aderării ne-au permis să realizăm proiecte esențiale de infrastructură. Peste 600 000 de tineri români au participat la programul Erasmus, însușindu-și astfel modul de viață european. Uniunea înseamnă un spațiu al siguranței, al protecției, al prosperității și al diversității. Uniunea Europeană rămâne prin excelență un spațiu al liberei circulații. Ridicarea în martie a controalelor la frontierele aeriene și maritime trebuie urmată, în mod firesc, în cel mai scurt timp, de eliminarea controalelor la frontierele terestre. Doar astfel vom avea reflectarea corectă și concretă a contribuției pe care România o aduce la consolidarea securității întregii Uniuni Europene. Doamnelor și domnilor, proiectul european necesită zi de zi atenție, efort, răbdare și onestitate, dacă vrem să trăim liberi într-o Europă unită și prosperă. România de astăzi este un promotor puternic al acțiunii coordonate în spiritul valorilor europene. Avem responsabilitatea de a susține o Europă care duce mai departe aceste principii și valori, inclusiv către prietenii noștri din vecinătatea europeană care au ales modelul nostru de democrație și dezvoltare, iar o etapă cheie a acestui proces o reprezintă chiar alegerile europene. Prioritățile pe care le vom defini împreună după aceste alegeri vor trebui să ne ajute să răspundem pragmatic la provocările prezentului și să ne pregătească mai bine pentru provocările viitorului. Distinguished Members of the European Parliament, our Union faces unprecedented geostrategic challenges. Our future and the future of the next generations depend on each and every decision we are taking now. On a global level, the rules-based international order is being challenged over and over again. Russia pursues its aggression against Ukraine. Around the Union, instability and insecurity have reached alarming levels. The open conflict in the Middle East, the situation in the Red sea and the worrying developments in the Sahel: all these have a systemic impact on our own security. Climate change, economic difficulties and illegal migration continue to generate their own negative impact, adding to the complexity of global dynamics. On top of all these challenges, we witness a crisis of values. And, as far as I see it, a crisis of public trust in our institutions. We are indeed facing an erosion of values within the European Union, which fuels the perception of decline of Europe, or at least of Europe’s leadership and global role. This is why we need to do more, to promote the feeling and the certainty that we are all part of the same community of values, which must be protected by every single one of us. Honourable Members of the European Parliament, at such a pivotal moment fundamental questions lie ahead of us. We must answer them together as Europeans with vision, courage and responsibility. First, what can we do and have to do as a Union? The current challenges are pushing us towards a transformative rethinking of our actions. The past few years proved that our common action as one, as a true Union, is key. Our unity has been repeatedly tested and has not faltered. More than this, it was a strategic surprise for some and brought us tactical advantages. We should build upon this. Second, thinking further, another crucial question emerges. What can we do more, internally? Strengthening our internal resilience is a fundamental condition for a stronger Union and for its increased geopolitical role. This is perhaps the most complex discussion. It includes finding the best strategies to respond to hybrid threats and to increase the functionality of our democratic systems. It means developing sectoral policies such as technology, including artificial intelligence, fighting climate change, stimulating competitiveness, industrial production, and sustainable supply chains. I do believe that the success of the démarches in these areas depends on a strong single market, which can provide solutions to many of the problems we face, encouraging creativity and large-scale development. We as a Union are now taking unprecedented steps to move away from a reactive approach in consolidating our internal resilience. We are taking action in terms of strengthening our internal capabilities such as infrastructure, green and digital transitions, civil crisis response, energy efficiency and supply chains. Another obvious line of action is to continue to support Ukraine. We must stand by Ukraine and its people. I have this conviction, despite certain voices invoking a European solidarity fatigue. Defending democracy, territorial integrity and sovereignty, as well as the rules-based international order, cannot be subject to any fatigue. Romania remains engaged in this common effort. We are strongly involved in supporting Ukraine as well as the Republic of Moldova, which is intensely affected by the crisis in the region. We also need to keep our focus on security. We are now moving towards a joint long-term planning and increased convergence in the field of European security and defence, while working in full complementarity with NATO. It is indeed high time to deliver on our European ambitions when it comes to our defence industry. Esteemed Members of the European Parliament, I wish to express my appreciation for the strong attachment to values that this House has always shown, but we must be aware about the growing Euroscepticism. Its adepts may raise issues that are in some part real, but they give wrong and dangerous solutions that would throw our societies into crisis. It is therefore, our common duty to be honest in our communication with the European citizens. Third, how can the Union further externalise its attractiveness? This is another key question to address when looking towards our future. How can we stay attractive as a Union? The answer is clear: enlarging our European family by accepting new members will only strengthen the Union. The historic decisions taken by the European Council last December on the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, as well as on Bosnia and Herzegovina and on Georgia, are a victory for the entire European Union. This Parliament has been strongly supportive of this objective, and I thank you for this. Romania has – and I personally have – strongly supported and promoted it. I think that it confirms the Union’s attractiveness at the time of hardship, strengthens its geopolitical weight, and creates opportunities for Member States and candidate countries alike. Enlargement is an essential part of our strategic answer to the geopolitical developments and the key investment in lasting peace, stability and democracy in our neighbourhood. At the same time, the European Union must assume a leading global role in preserving the international order as a precondition for preserving our way of life and our values. The European Union’s economic weight must be mirrored by its international political role. The challenges we are facing are global and some of them can only be solved by promoting relationships with partners with similar values and interests. Ensuring this strategic network of resilient partnerships will make us stronger and more competitive in the long run. This is why we need to intensify our global outreach towards Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America, and we do need to further consolidate the transatlantic link – this is crucial for our success. Two last questions. Do we have the means to achieve our goals? Which is the way forward and what is the future of the Union? The Union has the legal and institutional instruments to achieve its goals, and the response to the pandemic and the crisis that followed is illustrative. But it is equally obvious that we need to streamline our decision-making capacity. We need to closely analyse what measures can be taken in a context where some consider that the real efficiency of decision-making mechanisms is impossible without reopening the Treaties, while others radically rule out this possibility. There is no doubt that measures such as those discussed in relation to the qualified majority voting in specific areas of foreign and security policy can be taken without reopening the Treaties. Without excluding changes to the Treaties at some point, we need to use all available possibilities under the existing Treaties for smoother and quicker decision-making. Romania is fully engaged in this exercise. Honourable Members of the European Parliament, despite the views of some, we are stronger now than five years ago. We showed remarkable unity in probably the direst circumstances we had to face as a Union. Nevertheless, we have a lot of work ahead of us. Our European common construction is, after all, work in progress. As stated by Jacques Delors, the visionary European leader whom we recently paid homage to, ‘The European model is in danger if we obliterate the principle of personal responsibility’. Therefore, dear colleagues, it is our shared responsibility to do the best for all our citizens. We have a special responsibility towards our youth. The future generations are looking towards us with hope and optimism in times of geopolitical volatility and socioeconomic distress. The future of Europe is about the capacity of the Union to give them honest answers and to deliver in education, health, prosperity, climate security and employment opportunities. Five years ago, we adopted the Sibiu Declaration. The ten commitments made back then are still valid. Unity, solidarity, cohesion, the rule of law – they continue to lie at the very core of our joint European action. For my part, I remain deeply faithful to these valuable values and principles in my future endeavours, and I am convinced that these are the basis for the work done by you here in the European Parliament as well. I also believe that together we are able to maintain the Union on the path of success, staying true to our vision of a united and stronger Europe.
[EN] Manfred | Weber said from the PPE that on behalf of the PPE Group . – Madam President, Commissioner Šefčovič, President Iohannis, it is good to have you in the European Parliament. Welcome. I want to start with a quote: ‘We cannot ignore the challenges we face on the eastern flank. Security and defence are fundamental components of the Union’s future’. These, Mr President, are your words from the Munich Security Conference in 2019. I was in the audience. You were right then, and you are right now. The war in Ukraine has been a wake—up call for many, but not for you. When you entered into office in 2014, you said that defence was one of the priorities for Romania and for Europe. In 2017, you managed to get the Romanian Parliament to increase defence spending to meet the NATO 2% commitment, and in 2023, Romania committed to spend 2.5% of its GDP for defence. It is your determination that made Romania a strong pillar of European defence and one of Ukraine’s greatest allies. This is leadership at its best – not speaking about problems, but solving them. Dear President Iohannis, when we look at Romania today, we see a true European success story. Since joining the European Union in 2007, Romania has become Eastern Europe’s second—largest economy at an impressive speed, and a modern, attractive country. Bucharest is number one in the Balkans for building up start-ups; Cluj—Napoca is a true European tech hub. This is a country full of talent that is fighting to turn brain drain into brain gain. Great leaders are not only great at the national level, but they are also great on European level. You also reminded us that in the Sibiu EU summit in 2019 – the first EU summit to be held on Europe Day – you got all leaders to agree on a Europe that protects its citizens. You have advanced many EU defence initiatives, always working for a strong EU pillar in a strong NATO. You started many strategic discussions on enlargement, and it was also your strong voice in the European Council that made it possible to open the accession talks with Ukraine and Moldova last December. Europe owes a lot to Romanian leadership and Romania owes a lot to your leadership. You showed Romanian citizens that a modern, pro-European Romania is possible and is successful. I also want to thank the Romanian Commissioner and all Romanian colleagues in the plenary who also served this broader perspective. Dear President Iohannis, for us in the EPP there is no doubt that Romania must fully join the Schengen Area. You have been ready for 13 years on this subject. If planes and ships are crossing borders without inspection, why should cars and trucks have to wait in endless lines? Romania and Bulgaria must mean Schengen. It’s good for security, it’s good for the business, and it’s good for our citizens. In the middle of the Brexit crisis in 2019, the spirit of Sibiu was fresh air to relaunch Europe. Now, five years later – if I may say this from an EP point of view – the EP family will go to Bucharest for the congress. We will go to Romania to kick off our campaign and to kick off the campaign for the European elections. Once again, Romania is the place to shape a safer home for all Europeans. Thanks for your leadership.
[ES] Juan Fernando | López Aguilar said from the S-D that en nombre del Grupo S&D . – Señora presidenta Metsola, señor presidente Iohannis, después de escucharle con atención y respeto, quiero compartir con usted dos mensajes positivos. El primero: seguro que sabe cuántos en este Parlamento Europeo celebramos que, por fin, durante la Presidencia española, a finales de diciembre, se levantasen las restricciones para el pleno disfrute del espacio Schengen y, por tanto, del derecho fundamental a la libre circulación en las fronteras marítimas y aéreas a Rumanía y a Bulgaria. No sabe cuántas veces lo hemos pedido en este Parlamento Europeo en un histórico de Resoluciones —las últimas en 2022 y 2023— desde que en 2011 la Comisión decidiese que Rumanía y Bulgaria habían superado el mecanismo de verificación. Por tanto, enhorabuena, rumanos y búlgaros, que disfrutan de Schengen. Y el segundo mensaje positivo es el reconocimiento a la solidaridad europea en la primera línea frente a las personas desplazadas por la brutal guerra de agresión de Putin contra Ucrania. Tres millones, al menos, en su mayoría mujeres y niños en situación vulnerable, han entrado en la Unión Europea a través de las fronteras de Rumanía. Y, al menos, 200 000 permanecen en Rumanía disfrutando de la Directiva de protección temporal, lo que significa libre circulación sin visado, libre elección de residencia, acceso al mercado de trabajo y los servicios asociados al mercado de trabajo, además de los derechos a la educación y a la asistencia sanitaria. Por tanto, reconocimiento también a esa solidaridad en primera línea de la Directiva de protección temporal. Solo ayer este Parlamento Europeo validó 1 500 millones de euros para el Fondo de Solidaridad y 1 500 millones de euros para ayudar a la política de inmigración, lo que supone un refuerzo para el sostenimiento de los derechos de las personas que han entrado en la Unión Europea en búsqueda de protección a través de la Directiva de protección temporal.
[FR] Valérie | Hayer said from the Renew that au nom du groupe Renew . – Madame la Présidente, Monsieur le Président, Madame la Commissaire, chers collègues, la Roumanie entame une année électorale: élections législatives, présidentielle, européennes, locales. Ces élections seront cruciales, et c’est un symbole fort de voir que les Roumains écriront à la fois leur avenir national et européen en l’espace de quelques mois, car les valeurs comme les intérêts des Roumains sont solidement ancrés dans le projet européen. Je pourrais citer notre combat contre la corruption, notre soutien résolu au Parquet européen et à l’action de votre compatriote, Laura Codruța Kövesi, qui fait un travail dantesque à l’échelle de l’Europe entière après l’avoir fait depuis Bucarest. Ces valeurs, cet état de droit, sont la base de notre communauté de destins européenne. Notre famille, Renew Europe, se battra jusqu’au bout pour les protéger, pour les renforcer, pour les fixer. Les scrutins que j’évoquais s’inscriront dans une ère où les ingérences étrangères se multiplient sur notre sol. Les institutions devront être robustes car la protection cyber et la lutte contre la désinformation sont un défi de taille, autant que les discours de l’extrême droite, qui ne servent que la division et la haine, en Roumanie comme ailleurs, malheureusement. Votre responsabilité – protéger la démocratie et les institutions – sera donc grande, Monsieur le Président, et c’est parce que nous formons cette communauté de destin que je me réjouis de la levée des contrôles aux frontières aériennes et maritimes avec la Roumanie, mais aussi, le mois prochain, avec la Bulgarie. Je l’assure aujourd’hui devant cet hémicycle: notre groupe politique continuera à défendre la levée des contrôles aux frontières terrestres, aussi. C’est fondamental et prioritaire. Cette communauté de destin, c’est également le lien étroit que nous nouons avec le peuple ukrainien. Son combat, c’est aussi le nôtre. Sa sécurité, c’est aussi la nôtre. Je salue dans cette assemblée le rôle majeur de la Roumanie dans le soutien apporté à l’Ukraine car, lorsque la sécurité de notre continent est menacée, c’est ensemble que nous agissons. Je veux aussi avoir un mot pour la Moldavie. Je me réjouis, ainsi que mon groupe, que ces deux pays poursuivent, et même accélèrent, leur cheminement vers notre Union. Monsieur le Président, chers collègues, cette année électorale revêt une importance cruciale, non seulement pour la Roumanie, mais aussi pour l’ensemble de l’Europe. Nos libertés, nos institutions sont en jeu. Il relève de notre responsabilité à tous de les protéger.
[RO] Nicolae | Ştefănuță said from the Verts/ALE that în numele grupului Verts/ALE . – Doamnă președintă, domnule președinte, doamne ministre, doamnă comisară, vorbim azi despre viitorul Europei și României și ne dorim fiecare pace, libertate, egalitate. Realitatea acum nu este așa. O mulțime de români încă pleacă din țară. Nu avem spitale noi și avem o populație săracă. Milioane de tineri nu știu ce să spere de la viitor. Pentru ca populismul și extremismul să nu crească, și ați spus-o și dumneavoastră, democrația trebuie să meargă mână în mână cu traiul bun. Românii și bulgarii încă așteaptă la cozi în vamă și vor să intre demn și deplin în Schengen anul acesta. Domnule președinte, vă mulțumesc pentru angajamentul pe care îl dați Ucrainei și pentru orientarea dumneavoastră euroatlantică. Este lupta dreaptă, însă pentru că mandatul dumneavoastră și mandatul nostru în Parlamentul European vine la capăt, haideți să ne întrebăm. Ce Românie lăsăm în urmă pentru tinerii noștri ? Ce Europă le lăsăm lor ? Ce ne-am propus la Sibiu, orașul din care mă trag și eu? Haideți să punem viitorul tinerilor în centrul politicii. Tinerii au nevoie să fie ascultați, auziți, ajutați! Vreau să luptăm pentru o Românie care oferă tinerilor locuințe accesibile, locuri de muncă decente, servicii de sănătate, inclusiv mintală. Avem nevoie de cămine decente pentru studenții de acum. Viitorii noștri doctori, profesori, arhitecți învață în cămine cu igrasie, cu 4-5 în aceeași cameră. Viitorul președinte al României, domnule președinte, se găsește astăzi într-un astfel de cămin. Cum ne purtăm cu el sau ea? Ce îi oferim ei sau lui? Haideți să avem grijă și de mediu. Știu că vă pasă de mediu și eu țin foarte mult la această componentă și întreaga familie a Verzilor ține. Cum ar fi o Românie cu orașe mai verzi, cu aer curat, cu trenuri rapide? O Românie cu mâncare sănătoasă și cu mai mult respect pentru natură, sol, păduri, albine și animale. Aș vrea să las fetiței mele, care are astăzi patru ani, aș vrea să las un astfel de continent și o astfel de țară. Tinerii, și asta e o idee foarte importantă, nu vor să trăiască într-o țară cu extrema dreaptă la putere. De aceea, vă cer, domnule președinte, să nu permiteți un guvern fascist în România. Nu avem nevoie nici de un referendum nou al urii. Europa iubește drepturile omului și dreptul omului de a iubi pe cine dorește. Și pentru că am avut aici un caz în Parlamentul European, România trebuie să se asigure, domnule președinte, că nu permite agenților Rusiei să facă politică pentru români. Emil Cioran a spus „Trecutul României nu mă flatează și nu sunt mândru că strămoșii au dormit atâta timp în așteptarea libertății”. Astăzi suntem liberi. Noi nu așteptăm libertatea, dar nici nu vom ceda extremiștilor. Avem ce ne trebuie, avem resurse, dar mai ales avem inimă pentru o Românie mai bună.
[EN] Cristian | Terheş said from the ECR that on behalf of the ECR Group . – Madam President, Commissioner, President, dear colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, the ‘This is Europe’ debates held in the European Parliament are a great opportunity for European political leaders to express their vision about the current and future course of Europe. I congratulate, therefore, the Romanian President, Klaus Iohannis, for sharing his vision about Europe and emphasising the importance of Romania for the European project. But since the debate is about Europe, before we talk about what Europe is, it is imperative to look back and see what Europe was, how this project started, where it is heading, and if this new direction has anything in common with the initial project. When Ms von der Leyen held her speech in this plenary in 2019, she said that the European project is based ‘on Roman law and Greek philosophy’. She forgot one, and the most important pillar of the European project, the Judeo-Christian values, civilisation and culture. It was the Christian belief and Judeo-Christian values, based on the Bible, that gave the power and motivation to many political leaders from different European nations that killed, destroyed and decimated each other during the Second World War to meet after the war, pray together, forgive and reconcile with each other, and come up with an economical and political plan that would and did bring peace through prosperity. Because of these visionary, faithful and courageous political leaders, Western Europe was able to achieve peace and hold it for over 80 years, which was unprecedented for Europe. I say ‘Western Europe’ because, us in Eastern Europe were under the Soviet occupation and we experienced a different kind of political and economic system, an atheistic one, in which the state and the Communist Party were God, where the state was above all and people were deprived of their basic fundamental rights. The difference between the two political and economic systems that Europe experienced after the Second World War – the European project that we witness here, which evolved in the European Community and Union in Western Europe, and the USSR and the Soviet Marxist and communist model in Eastern Europe – is exactly the pillar that was intentionally or not forgotten by Ursula von der Leyen: the Judeo-Christian values, culture and civilisation. The Judeo-Christian values are the source of and notions that later evolved and were mentioned in international treaties, national constitutions and laws like human dignity, equality before the law, the separation of powers in the state or inalienable fundamental human rights. Robert Schuman, a founding father of the European Project and former President of the European Parliament, said, ‘Democracy owes its existence to Christianity [...] Christianity teaches equality of all nature of all men, children of the same God, redeemed by the same Christ, without distinction of race, colour, class or profession [...] Democracy will be Christian or it won’t exist. An unchristian democracy is a caricature which sinks into tyranny or anarchy.’ It was exactly these Judeo-Christian values that brought peace, prosperity, respect among nations in Western Europe, and the lack of them that brought tyranny, abuse and poverty in the USSR, in Eastern Europe. It was this faith in God that my fellow Romanians held strong under communism and motivated them to dream and fight for freedom. It is therefore incomprehensible for many fellow Romanians why in the past 40 years exactly these personal and national freedoms have been violated by the European Commission under Ursula von der Leyen. The European project was built on a free market principle which was brought, which has brought prosperity in Western Europe. In the past four years, under the current European Commission, we see that free market principles are becoming an overregulated one, which is making the European businesses and products less likely to be competitive on the global market. The European project was built on the concept that fundamental human rights are inalienable, and the governments must not force or impose medical products into citizens bodies, but allowed them to decide based on their free and informed consent. We saw what happened during the pandemic, when people were forced to be vaccinated with medical products that we find out now, later on, have many adverse effects. Europe has long been a reference of democracy and human rights, championing principles of liberty, equality and the rule of law. An erosion of these fundamental rights, even by EU entities, represents a betrayal of our shared values and must be met with firm opposition. The Romanian nation, which I most proudly represent, was able to overcome any challenges during history and become today one of the fastest growing economies in Europe. We did it through faith and fight for freedom.
[EN] Gunnar | Beck said from the ID that on behalf of the ID Group . – Madam President, Mr Commissioner, Your Excellency, Romania’s motor insurance industry has been in turmoil in recent years: 12 companies providing motor insurance have been driven out of business in just 12 years. A total of 12 insurance fails in 12 years should raise serious concerns about the regulatory environment in the Member State. In 2019, the Romanian insurance regulator ASF asked Euroins Romania to buy the then-failing City Insurance. Just three years later, ASF suspended Euroins’ insurance license in Romania, apparently for questionable reasons. This was Romania’s last motor insurer gone. Last year, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development raised questions with the Romanian Finance Minister about the actions of ASF and submitted a resolution proposal to your predecessor to the effect. The European insurance watchdog, EIOPA, wrote a report about the Euroins affair. In a reply to my written question, the Commission claims it never saw the report. To date, I’m denied access to the full details of the EIOPA report. What are ASF and EIOPA trying to hide from the Commission and Members of Parliament? One observation following the decision to strip Euroins of its licence: ASF awarded a licence to Eazy Asigurări, a subsidiary of Superbet. And who’s the chairman of Superbet? One of Commission President Ursula von der Leyen’s brothers. Your Excellency, Romania is one of the largest net recipients of EU money. You are receiving EUR 10 billion from the European budget and the NextGenerationEU fund. According to the Corruption Perception Index of Transparency International, you are the second most corrupt country in the European Union. Now, none of this is ideal for a country hoping to attract foreign investors. What, I am asking, are you proposing to do about it?
[EN] Clare | Daly said from the The Left that on behalf of The Left Group . – Madam President and President, I listened very carefully to your opening remarks. And for me, I think, Romania is one of the most interesting European countries. I think the Romanian people are pretty much like the Irish people, in my experience, in terms of their approach to life. I spent a month in Timişoara and Bucharest in the spring of 1990 as a student leader from Ireland, and learned so much about the hopes and aspirations of Romanian citizens in the post-Ceauşescu years. And I think against that backdrop, for me, it’s quite unfortunate to see that, since joining the EU, so many Romanian people have been forced to leave the country or been hoovered up by Western Europe as a sort of pool of cheap labour, rather than having the opportunities that they should have had at home. I’m sorry to see that you ended up joining NATO and that you’re spending so much of your defence money on things that really should be spent on making people’s lives better. And I am sorry to see cases such as the one highlighted by my colleague about the very, very serious problems and questions that remain to be answered regarding the operation of the Romanian regulator, the ASF, because of the consequential impact not just on your own drivers, but also across the EU motor insurance sector. And I, too, am one of the Members of this House who for many months now have been raising questions about that regulator’s decision to withdraw the licence to Euroins Romania, which is obviously part of the largest independent insurance group in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe. Now, I know you know about that case, Mr President – and not just because my colleague raised it – but it is beyond curious that the Romanian regulator acted against this company three years after requesting them to take over City Insurance. Why did they do this? It is a fact that both the Bulgarian financial regulator and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development queried what your regulator was up to. Both of them approached the European authorities. One of the organisations produced a report cautioning against the consequences of this. They even produced a resolution proposal which would have mitigated the impacts, but nothing happened. And your country faces exposure to a EUR 500 million lawsuit, not to mention the broader impact beyond. Having brought this to the attention of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, who are supposed to mitigate these issues but who have failed to produce the report for Members of this Parliament – it’s been withheld from us – I’m deeply concerned about the security around this case. So I suppose my question, Mr President, is really quite a simple one. In the interests of the citizens of Romania and beyond, would you join us in supporting our call to the European Commission to initiate a comprehensive and independent review of this case?
[EN] Ioan-Rareş | Bogdan said from the PPE that – Madam President, domnule președinte, Excelențele Voastre, today, the big day, I will speak my language. Doamnă președintă, am avut privilegiul de a asculta alături de dumneavoastră analiza și viziunea unui adevărat om de stat, Klaus Iohannis, președintele României în ultimii 9 ani, votat de două ori de aproape șapte milioane de români de fiecare dată. Ați ascultat discursul unui om cu vocație europeană despre Europa și construcția europeană. Nu este un simplu discurs. Aceasta este România, distinși colegi. Cea mai importantă țară pentru asigurarea securității UE la Marea Neagră și țara care are 650 de kilometri de granița cu Ucraina. În România, au primit adăpost peste 7 milioane de ucraineni, femei, bătrâni și copii fugind din calea războiului în ultimii doi ani de zile. Românii nu și-au blocat niciun moment granițele, nici nu i-au privit cu ostilitate pe cei care au căutat să salveze viețile lor și ale copiilor. Dimpotrivă, la nivel instituțional, în frunte cu președintele Iohannis și la nivel uman, fiecare român și-a deschis inima și casa în fața refugiaților. Nu suntem nici cei mai bogați din Europa și nici cei mai ajutați din Europa, dar avem un cult strămoșesc pentru ospitalitate și ajutor. Aceasta este România, o țară sinceră, deși este cea mai atacată țară din UE în războiul informațional dus de un dictator, Putin, împotriva civilizației occidentale. Kremlinul a înțeles că România este o miză colosală și investește masiv în coruperea minților alegătorilor și în încercarea de a destabiliza România și dinamita din interior Uniunea Europeană. Încearcă să dinamiteze valorile civilizației occidentale. Vă asigur însă că românii vor rămâne europeni prin excelență, iar președintele Iohannis va garanta până în ultima zi a mandatului său acest lucru. Aceasta este România, țara cu cel mai mare potențial energetic din Uniunea Europeană și de ale cărei investiții finanțate și din bani europeni, nu puțini, dar nu destui, va depinde în mare parte independența energetică a Europei. Președintele Iohannis, așa cum v-ați convins, este un șef de stat echilibrat și rațional, profund european, așa cum mi-aș dori să văd și alți șefi de stat, în special în zonele vecine României. Este un președinte care a echilibrat într-un mod admirabil interesul țării sale, fără a afecta interesul Europei în regiune. A trecut vremea individualităților și a orgoliilor. Viitorul va demonstra că echilibrul câștigă forțe în fața nesăbuinței. În țara mea există un cântec cântat pentru prima dată acum 150 de ani. Se numește Hora Unirii, iar versurile sunt „Unde-i unul, nu-i putere, la nevoi și la durere. Unde-s doi, puterea crește și dușmanul nu sporește”. Hora Unirii, în această perioadă complicată și plină de provocări de securitate, poate fi adaptată ca mesaj, ca un adevărat imn al Europei actuale.
[RO] Maria | Grapini said from the S-D that – Doamnă președintă, domnule președinte, stimată doamnă ministru și întreaga echipă, la început vreau să vă mulțumesc pentru că ați descris atât de frumos țara mea. Așa este și aș vrea, stimați colegi, cei care astăzi ați încercat să o blamați, să înțelegeți România. Vizitați-o întâi, discutați cu oamenii de acolo și înțelegeți-o. Domnule președinte, voi fi obiectivă. Vreau să ridic problemele pe care le-am ridicat în fața tuturor șefilor de stat și de guverne și să vă întreb: chiar vă place cum arată acum Europa? Credeți că s-ar fi putut face mai mult? Există cu adevărat o coeziune socială? Există o echitate? Eu sunt vicepreședinta Comisiei pentru piața internă și protecția consumatorilor și refuz să folosesc termenul de „piață unică” pe care dumneavoastră l-ați folosit, ca de altfel și domnul comisar Breton. Nu cred că este o piață unică și pentru asta trebuie să ne luptăm, domnule președinte. Eu închei al doilea mandat cu un gust amar că România nu este în piața internă, că nu suntem în Schengen și este nedrept, și au spus-o colegii din toate grupurile politice. Apoi, credeți că politica agricolă comună (PAC) este echitabilă? De ce de atâta timp nu avem această echitate? Fermierii din toate statele, dacă avem o singură piață internă în toate statele, să fie la fel recompensați. Cred că sunt lucruri care ar fi putut să se rezolve în această perioadă și nu cred că nu trebuie, chiar pe ultima sută de metri să insistați, domnule președinte, pentru că, știm bine, în Consiliu se decide în final cum să meargă Europa și încotro.
[RO] Dacian | Cioloş said from the Renew that – Doamnă președintă, domnule președinte, anul electoral 2024 este crucial pentru Europa, pentru că valorile pe care s-a construit și a funcționat până acum sunt sub asediul extremismului, antieuropenismului și al dezinformării. De aceea, pentru a ține democrația vie, dezbaterile din acest an trebuie să fie relevante pentru viața de zi cu zi a cetățenilor și mai puțin pentru supraviețuirea partidelor politice sau ale unor lideri politici. Pentru România, provocarea e și mai mare. Avem în acest an toate rândurile de alegeri. Acest lucru poate duce la resetarea totală a establishmentului politic și, în ciuda unui avans lent pe drumul european, România a ajuns, prin efortul întregii societăți, un actor cheie în partea de Uniune în care se află, un pilon estic al Uniunii. Domnule președinte Klaus Iohannis, sunteți ultimul actor politic care va ieși din scenă după alegerile din acest an fără o miză electorală personală. Până atunci, aveți datoria de a veghea, asigura și comunica cetățenilor români importanța apartenenței noastre europene într-un an complicat, cu provocări populiste, și consider că puteți face acest lucru în mod credibil și în mod asumat. România și Uniunea Europeană nu-și permit alunecarea în idei extremiste fără soluții și toată această presiune electorală ne ridică și întrebarea profilului de lider pe care cetățeanul român și european îl așteaptă astăzi. Pentru că, după multe dezamăgiri, românii au senzația că liderii politici nu mai vorbesc suficient cu ei și prea puțin pe limba lor atunci când o fac. Efortul pentru a recrea punți în societatea noastră afectată de crize va fi mare, dar cauza este una esențială atât pentru noi, cât și pentru Uniune, în ansamblul ei și pentru viitorul ei, pentru credibilitatea Uniunii. Fermierii, tinerii fără perspectivă, cetățenii ignorați din județele periferice sau din micile orașe, trebuie remotivați și angajați într-o viziune de viitor în care să se regăsească și în care Bruxelles-ul sau Strasbourg-ul sunt aliații lor, și nu dușmanii lor închipuiți.
[DE] Anna | Deparnay-Grunenberg said from the Verts/ALE that – Frau Präsidentin! This is Europe – das ist Europa. Und ja, wir haben keine Wahl, als gemeinsam, verehrte Kolleginnen und Kollegen, für unsere Klimastabilität und unsere Artenvielfalt einzustehen. Wir brauchen Rumänien und seine Schatzkammern an Primär- und Urwäldern. Ich fordere Sie auf, verehrter Herr Präsident Iohannis, sich für den Schutz dieser Wälder einzusetzen. Ich war schon öfter in Rumänien, in den Făgăraș Mountains und in vielen schönen Orten, und ich habe die Schönheit Ihrer einzigartigen Wälder gesehen. Ich habe unzählige Tier- und Pflanzenarten – endemische – gesehen. Ich habe aber auch die fortschreitende Abholzung gesehen, Kahlschläge bis zum Horizont, leider auch illegale Abholzung in Natura-2000-Gebieten, riesige Furchen in der Erde und schlimme Erosion, weil keine Wurzeln mehr den Hang halten. Vor vier Jahren hat die EU ein Vertragsverletzungsverfahren eingeleitet. Die rumänische Regierung versprach Verbesserungen und Maßnahmen. Immer noch sind Korruption und illegale Abholzung an der Tagesordnung. Deshalb frage ich Sie heute, Herr Präsident Iohannis: Wie kommen Sie voran mit den abgesprochenen Reformen der Schulung der Försterinnen und Förster, der Rückverfolgung des Holzeinschlags? Und was tun Sie auch für die Umweltschützer und Umweltschützerinnen? Die EU schaut auf Sie; wir brauchen Ihre Hilfe.
[IT] Anna | Bonfrisco said from the ID that – Signora Presidente, onorevoli colleghi, signor Presidente Iohannis, a marzo Lei guiderà la Romania nell'area di Schengen. È un momento storico e ciò renderà più forte l'Unione europea e il suo paese. Con orgoglio le do il benvenuto, anche da rappresentante dell'Italia, poiché Romania e Italia aggiungeranno una nuova tessera alla propria amicizia, fondata su profondi e antichi legami storici, sociali, umani, economici, commerciali e culturali fondati sui valori giudaico—cristiani. In Italia vivono oltre 1 000 000 di cittadini rumeni e allo stesso tempo 19 000 aziende italiane hanno sede in Romania. I nostri Stati crescono e possono crescere insieme. Siamo legati anche dall'alleanza della NATO, la Romania è parte della missione Sea Guardian per la difesa del Mediterraneo e, a maggior ragione, dentro l'area di Schengen rafforzeremo la nostra alleanza nel campo della cooperazione di polizia e giudiziaria, nella lotta alle organizzazioni criminali, per garantire sicurezza all'Unione europea e agli alleati, così come la Romania, con grande generosità, ha accolto i profughi dall'Ucraina aggredita. Colgo però anche l'opportunità che ho oggi di parlare con Lei per chiedere attenzione anche a un tema forse minore, ma legato al traffico illecito di animali e al maltrattamento degli animali, una delle maggiori fonti di finanziamento illegale delle organizzazioni criminali del mondo. Dobbiamo agire insieme, uniti nella storia, nei valori, nelle economie, nelle sfide, nell'amicizia che diamo, dimostrazione del significato più autentico dell'Europa. Buon lavoro, Presidente.
[EN] Paulo | Rangel said from the PPE that – Madam President, President Iohannis, Madam Commissioner, Herta Müller once wrote: ‘In this country, we had to walk, eat, sleep and love in fear’. When we read about life in Communist times, we can only appreciate Romania’s success in the European project. Romanian culture and heritage is indispensable for Europe because it merges the Roman—Latin culture with Orthodox heritage and with Germanic, Slavic and Magyar influence. That gives Romanians a unique ability to understand European diversity. We have seen Romania’s amazing economic development under your Presidency and impressive progress in the rule of law. Today, when we see attacks on the rule of law in Spain, in Malta, in Slovakia, we have to congratulate you, Mr President, for your exemplary leadership. We have an historic step in the lifting of air and sea border controls, but that is not enough. Romania, like Bulgaria, must fully join Schengen. You dealt with the migration crisis, pandemic restrictions and the arrival of war refugees in an extraordinary manner under immense pressure. The EPP has always been on your side in this matter. As the great Romanian poet Mihai Eminescu once wrote, ‘vreme trece, vreme vine’, or ‘time goes by, time comes along’. The time for complete and full accession to Schengen has come.
[DE] Marc | Angel said from the S-D that – Frau Präsidentin! Sehr geehrter Herr Präsident Iohannis, es ist uns eine große Ehre, Sie hier im Haus der europäischen Demokratie empfangen zu können. Und wir begrüßen natürlich, dass rumänische Bürgerinnen und Bürger im Schengen-Raum fortan Luft- und Seegrenzen kontrollfrei überqueren können. Wir sind aber als Sozialisten und Sozialdemokraten sehr enttäuscht, dass die Kontrollen an den Landesgrenzen, die für viele verlorene Stunden, für viel Unmut – das ist klimaschädlich, das ist wirtschaftsschädlich – bestehen bleiben. Und übrigens, auch Hilfsgüter, die für die Ukraine bestimmt sind, sind lange blockiert. Das ist unverständlich und ungerecht, und deshalb geben wir nicht auf, den Rat aufzufordern, umgehend das Wegfallen der Kontrollen an den Landesgrenzen zu beschließen. Rumänien wie auch Bulgarien haben sich dies durch harte Arbeit verdient. Diese Entwicklung wird unsere europäische Familie und unser gemeinsames Projekt weiter stärken. Sehr geehrter Herr Präsident! Wir stehen vor gewaltigen Herausforderungen, so zum Beispiel der Digitalisierung unserer Gesellschaften. Ich hatte vor Kurzem die Ehre, auf einer Veranstaltung meines rumänischen Kollegen Victor Negrescu über digitale Kompetenzen im ländlichen Raum teilzunehmen. In diesem Zusammenhang habe ich einige sehr interessante Projekte in Rumänien in Erfahrung bringen können. Daher wollte ich Sie fragen, wie Sie die Herausforderungen der digitalen Transformation in Europa sehen, und welche Erfolgsrezepte Sie uns mit auf den Weg geben. Müssen wir weiter regulieren, oder lassen wir – was ich nicht hoffe – den Tech-Giganten und den Algorithmen freien Lauf?
[RO] Vlad-Marius | Botoş said from the Renew that – Doamnă președintă, stimată doamnă ministru, stimate domnule președinte, mă simt onorat că Președintele României se adresează Parlamentului European de la Strasbourg. România este vecină cu Ucraina și cu Republica Moldova, unde Rusia nu vrea să înceteze să-și exercite influența. România este riverană a Mării Negre, unde războiul afectează toate statele din zonă și nu numai. De aceea, este foarte important ca România să rămână o țară cu adevărat democratică, ancorată în valorile europene. This is Europe , aceasta este tema dezbaterii noastre de astăzi, iar România este parte a Uniunii Europene de 17 ani. Vedem în mod constant dezvoltarea și modernizarea țării noastre, la care au contribuit semnificativ cele 90 de miliarde de euro din fonduri europene, dar și faptul că cetățenii români au acces la o piață unică, la economia și cultura europeană, chiar dacă încă nu suntem pe deplin membri ai spațiului Schengen. Aici ar trebui să apăsăm mai tare accelerația și mă bucur că ați spus-o și dumneavoastră răspicat astăzi, în acest plen. România a demonstrat că are în ADN-ul său valorile europene și le promovează. Chiar și atunci când politicienii români au luat decizii greșite, cetățenii au apărat cu înverșunare și apără încă valorile europene, democrația și statul de drept, iar Europa înseamnă stat de drept. Și această formulă are o greutate teribilă în viețile fiecăruia dintre noi. Avem toți un set de reguli și nimeni, oricât de înaltă i-ar fi funcția, nu e mai presus de regulile acestea. Dacă tot vorbim de reguli, poate n-ar strica să ne aducem toți aminte că regulile sunt reguli și când vine vorba despre alegeri, iar încrederea fiecărui cetățean european în instituțiile europene va fi cu atât mai mare dacă reușim să explicăm deschis, pas cu pas, nu doar ce pot face ei pentru Europa, ci și ce face Europa pentru ei în fiecare zi. Asta nu o vom putea face dacă dezbaterea în România se încearcă a fi mutată în altă parte, în același timp cu alegerile europene din același an.
[EN] Damian | Boeselager said from the Verts/ALE that – Madam President, Mr President, thank you, President Iohannis, for sharing your perspectives on our common European future. Very often this House is used for national debates, even from prime ministers and presidents, so I am very thankful that you shared your vision for what Europe should look like. So let me ask you quite concretely, when do you think can we have an improved decision-making in the Council? When will we move to qualified majority? When can we actually change the Treaties? I would love to hear an answer on that. And then second, we have a great moment of European democracy coming up with the European elections. But looking at the different countries and also at Romania, I do see inhibiting factors to democracy, such as the amount of signatures you need to collect to be able to run as a party, such as the fact that you have, I think, to be 23 to be able to be a candidate. These are all things that could potentially slow down our democratic participation. So maybe the last question on this: will you advance the European electoral law act that we proposed here in 2020, with the second vote for transnational lists to strengthen our European democracy?
[DE] Sven | Simon said from the PPE that – Frau Präsidentin! Herr Präsident Iohannis, Sie sind ein Präsident, der sich im eigenen Land immer für Reformen stark gemacht hat. Sie stehen für einen starken Rechtsstaat. Ihr Kampf gegen Korruption hat Vorbildcharakter. Und es ist maßgeblich Ihr Verdienst, dass Rumänien jetzt Teil des Schengener Abkommens wird. Genau diese Reformstärke brauchen wir jetzt auch auf europäischer Ebene. Die Europäische Union ist gegründet worden zum Schutz der Europäer voreinander. Heute müssen wir sie weiterentwickeln zum Schutz der Europäer füreinander in der Welt. Vor einigen Monaten hat das Europäische Parlament Reformvorschläge unterbreitet, mit dem Ziel, die Europäische Union handlungsfähiger zu machen. Der Rat tut sich schwer mit einer Antwort, der Entscheidung für einen Konvent. Sie, Herr Präsident, haben angesprochen, dass wir vieles ändern könnten ohne Vertragsänderungen. Aber wenn wir wirklich die innere Widerstandsfähigkeit, wie Sie gesagt haben, und die äußere Handlungsfähigkeit verbessern wollen, brauchen wir einen Konvent. Deshalb bitte ich Sie heute um Unterstützung im Rat für die Einberufung dieses Konvents.
[RO] Tudor | Ciuhodaru said from the S-D that – Doamnă președintă, pentru a rezolva problemele globale, trebuie să le rezolvăm în primul rând pe cele de acasă, din fiecare țară. Aud că ne preocupă crizele și soluțiile globale, dar i-am uitat pe oamenii de lângă noi, am pierdut contactul cu cei pe care îi reprezentăm. Nemulțumirile românilor sunt tot mai multe și mai numeroase și sunt legate de traiul de fiecare zi. Acum vedem nemulțumirile fermierilor și ale celor din transporturi, dar adevărul e că scăderea nivelului de trai ne-a afectat pe toți. Domnule președinte, am fi putut face mai multe și mai mult pentru România. Onorată Comisie, onorat Consiliu, ați ignorat adesea problemele și durerile poporului meu și ale țării mele, iar aici am văzut, din păcate, prea mulți ghiocei politici care nu sunt în stare, nu au putut să spună „nu” atunci când interesele noastre au fost călcate în picioare. Eu pot să spun „nu” de fiecare dată și o voi face și de acum încolo. De aceea, cred că este un moment în care trebuie să ne reconectăm la problemele oamenilor. Fiecare în țara lui, fiecare în orașului și cred că doar așa putem să le creștem încrederea că ceea ce facem aici este doar spre binele fiecăruia dintre ei. Eu cred că doar așa și Iașul, și România vor fi pe mâini bune, la fel ca întreaga Europă.
[HU] Loránt | Vincze said from the PPE that – Jó napot kívánok! Doamnă președintă, domnule președinte, fiecare cetățean român înțelege această urare în limba maghiară. Nu pentru că majoritatea a început să învețe limba minorității, ci pentru că în 2020 ați folosit limba maghiară ca instrument politic împotriva adversarilor dumneavoastră. Iar de când sunteți președinte nu ați răspuns deloc la propunerea venită din partea comunității maghiare de a realiza un pact majoritate-minoritate. Există modele de succes în protecția minorităților europene în țări membre ale Uniunii Europene, care nici măcar nu pot fi discutate la București, iar între timp extremiștii capătă forță în România. Xenofobia, pe de o parte, și comportamentul antidemocratic, antieuropean, pe de altă parte, provin din aceeași rădăcină. Sunt de acord cu dumneavoastră, rămân multe de făcut în România și în Uniunea Europeană pentru România. Ne aflăm pe un traseu de integrare deplină la Uniunea Europeană. De aceea, aderarea integrală la zona Schengen trebuie să devină realitate, pentru că este dreptul nostru câștigat.
[IT] Brando | Benifei said from the S-D that – Signora Presidente, onorevoli colleghi, signor Presidente Iohannis, la Romania è un importante paese europeo. Dopo aver aderito all'Unione nel 2007, entrerà nello spazio Schengen dal prossimo marzo. Questa è una bella notizia, perché ci parla di un'Europa più unita e più forte, dove i cittadini possono godere di uguali diritti. Un'Europa che, oggi, deve affrontare grandi sfide insieme. Abbiamo approvato in questo Parlamento, in questi mesi, il primo regolamento al mondo che norma l'intelligenza artificiale, ma non basta. Penso al fenomeno migratorio, dove l'Europa deve parlare a una sola voce, senza veti nazionalisti, per gestire finalmente in modo strutturato e non emergenziale gli arrivi di esseri umani, dal Mediterraneo come dai Balcani. Rivoluzione digitale, migrazioni, ma anche cambiamento climatico, nuove frontiere del lavoro e contrasto alle disuguaglianze: queste sono priorità della nostra agenda politica. Le elezioni europee si avvicinano e saranno cruciali per il futuro di questo continente. Sono milioni i giovani europei che chiedono un futuro migliore. Dobbiamo essere capaci di garantirglielo facendo le scelte giuste.
[EN] Siegfried | Mureşan said from the PPE that – Madam President, President Iohannis, welcome back to the European Parliament. We very well remember here your speech from 2018 when you stood up for European values and told us that unity and solidarity are the solutions for Europe. Time has proven you right. We have seen that Europe stays united. It provides solutions and helps people in need. We have seen you defending European values, and we have seen you defending a European approach to challenges that we are facing. Romania has chosen the pro-European path and we have seen a European decade in Romania under your leadership. And for this we say thank you today. We are seeing today that Romania believes in Europe, and we are also seeing that Europe believes in Romania. Together, we have managed over recent years to create the biggest package of economic support after the pandemic. You always advocated for strong support for Ukraine. You led the efforts of supporting the Republic of Moldova, and you helped Europe understand that we are only safe if our neighbouring countries are safe. Looking ahead, our common task is to defend Europe. Europe means security. Europe means prosperity, democracy, rule of law, and Europe means stability. As pro-Europeans, we shall continue to provide solutions and tell people that extremism is no solution to any of the difficulties and challenges that we face. As pro-Europeans, we have to speak up to defend Europe and defend European values. This is what we stand for as a clear majority of pro-Europeans here in the European Parliament. This is what we are ready to achieve in the next years together with you.
[ES] Domènec | Ruiz Devesa said from the S-D that – Señora presidenta Metsola, señor presidente Iohannis, gracias por sus palabras. Yo le felicito por su compromiso con la integración europea y por su europeísmo. Agradezco también que haya hecho mención en su intervención a la dimensión institucional. Es evidente que, con una Europa ampliada, con el relanzamiento del proceso de ampliación, ese proceso debe acompañare de la profundización de nuestro proyecto político en clave federal. Usted se ha referido a la cuestión de no excluir las reformas de los Tratados, lo cual celebro, y creo que hay que dar también un paso más allá en esa dirección. Usted se ha referido a las cláusulas pasarela. Es verdad: se pueden activar; están en el Tratado de Lisboa para poder decidir más asuntos por mayoría cualificada. Pero en catorce años el Consejo no ha sido capaz de activar ni una sola de ellas. Espero que no tengamos que esperar otros catorce años. Por favor, apoye la propuesta del Parlamento de reforma de los Tratados.
[BG] Tsvetelina | Penkova said from the S-D that – Г-жо Председател, повече от 12 години България и Румъния изпълняват всички технически критерии за присъединяването ни към Шенгенското пространство, за пълноправно членство в Шенген. Този факт е оценен и многократно потвърждаван и тук, в пленарната зала на Европейския парламент. Въпреки това, поради политически причини, ние вече над десетилетие сме държани извън Шенгенското пространство, а нашите съграждани се третират като втора ръка европейци. Изпълняваме задълженията си, а нашите съграждани са лишени от полагащите им се права. Ето защо не бива да се самозалъгваме, че частичното членство на България и Румъния в Шенген е успех. Г-н Президент, имам няколко въпроса към Вас. Какви са общите действия, които обсъждате с България, за да доведат възможно най-бързо до премахване на сухопътните транспортни проверки? Какъв според Вас е реалистичният срок за полагащото ни се пълноправно членство в Шенген? Това дискриминационно отношение към български и румънски граждани не може да продължава.
[EN] Nikos | Papandreou said from the S-D that – Madam President, I would like to thank the Romanian President for his presentation today. Our two countries have similar histories, not just in Christian orthodoxy, but we had dictatorships – you had a totalitarian country run by the Kremlin, we had a dictatorship run by the Pentagon. Today we see clouds gathering over Europe. We have the European elections. I would like your wisdom and your experience. How do we convince the voter that the solution is not the extreme populists, but more democracy? That we need a new contract for the citizens of Europe? That’s what I would call it, a ‘contract’ to complete the European project, something that most of the Members here and the farmers in the streets feel has not been completed. So it’s our duty and your wisdom, perhaps, in the answer, will help us come up with the proper arguments to bring about the Europe of our dreams.
[EN] Klaus | Iohannis said from the NULL that President of Romania . – Madam President, honourable Members of the European Parliament, thank you very much. This is a privilege for me to speak to you here in the centre of European democracy. Thank you for your very positive feedback. I thank the speakers of the political groups for their positions, and I appreciate very much the positive and constructive approach in all the views expressed here. But let me thank you specifically for one issue, most of all mentioned, which is the Schengen issue. Romania is a very determined, a very strong and a very faithful member of the Union. We really believe that the Union has to be united, strong, secure, prosperous. To make this happen, we have to finish the European integration of all the Member States, including Romania. So let’s hope that we make the decisive step. We have the first step in place. It is a good sign, and let’s continue. There have been then some issues and – I think you agree – it would go too far if I answered each and every question. So let me just point out a relatively small number of issues, and I think you expect me to be honest on these things. So I’ll try to be short and honest. When I ran for president in 2014, for the first time, I promised to the Romanians a couple of things. I’m not a great speaker, and I am not excelling in promises, so I said I will keep Romania firm on the European track, on the transatlantic track. I will see about the economy as far as the president can do this to bring more prosperity. But one important issue, which was very dear to me – I promised to strengthen the rule of law, which I did. We have less corruption. We have an independent judiciary. And this is not what I say – it is what the Commission says and what you said because you accepted the Commission’s report on the so-called CVM. And one important issue was not only to have an independent judiciary, a strong prosecution – it was also important to have independent regulators. Well, I heard that one regulator had an issue with one business, and as everywhere in a democracy and the rule of law, people, if they feel that decision was not so good, go before a judge. This is what happened, and the judges decided that the decision was correct. This is what I understand if we speak about the rule of law: everybody has the same right. Everybody has the right to a fair trial, and everybody has to accept the result. Now, many of you asked more or less precisely what I believe should happen in the European Union. I stated a number of issues in my opening remarks, but if it comes to it, what should we do with the Union to make it function better? Where are the problems? Where are the real problems? Where are the systemic problems and what can be done? Well, some systemic problems and some important issues have been discussed in this House, on our streets, in the marketplaces, and in convenings. I think you just finished before I arrived a discussion about the common European agricultural policy. That’s an issue. We have a decision on this as of 2020, four years ago. So obviously, people ask me and I ask others, ‘Why did it take us four years and huge European protests to rethink some issues of the common agricultural policy?’ Maybe it could have happened faster. We are talking about the environment, about climate change. That’s all correct. Personally, I’m very much involved in these issues. I am really convinced that we have to fight climate change, and I believe that we have to protect our environment, and we can do it. We proved it. We proved it in Romania, and we have a good policy in this respect. But we have to do more. Now we have the Green Deal, which is super. But let me tell you, if it is not sustainable and if it does not lead to economic growth, and if we do not take everybody with us, it will be a failure. So, bref , elections upcoming – most of you are probably running for new mandate. That’s fine. Not me, I’m finished. At the end of this year, I finish my mandate and that’s it. So I believe that three things should be changed or should be improved. First, our relationship with the European citizens. My impression – maybe I’m wrong – is that if the citizens are here, we are here. We are levitating a bit high. Maybe we should decrease and be closer to our citizens, because what we do is correct but we lost, almost lost, our ability to explain this to our people. We are not really performing well when it comes to communicating our very good results. We are doing a super job and more and more Europeans believe the Union is failing. Well, this is about communication: communication between the voters and the politicians. So this is one issue where I believe we can and should do more and better. Second, some of you asked about decision-making. It is about the architecture of the Union. How do we make it better? And we have to improve it, because if we take in Ukraine, Moldova and the Western Balkans, we will be a large Union, and this decision-making, especially in crisis, war, pandemic and energy crisis, has to be correct, transparent but fast. So I believe that we have to work on our architecture. Some of it may be possible to change without opening the Treaties, but some issues have to be changed in the Treaties. They are not perfect. Since we have these Treaties – I hope you don’t mind me telling you – years have passed. We are a different Union and we work towards a different Union. I hope very much you agree: we work towards a better Union, so let’s work on this. At least one issue – and you will know what I mention – it is not acceptable that one member is using a veto to stop all of us helping others. So if we’re not in a position yet to generalise a qualified majority voting, which may be defined different than it is now, not talking about the details, but at least we should have the courage to say ‘no veto’ and let’s take it out of the decision-making process. That’s something very concrete we should do. Finally, our external image, well, I believe we have to be much better here. First, we have to integrate those who want to be with us and those we want to be with us: Ukraine, Moldova, Western Balkans. They try to become part of the Union, some of them for 20 years. I mean, are we serious? Are we? Do we want them? If we do, let’s go. If not, let’s say to them ‘no’. But dragging on, you know very well, never makes things better. Somehow linked to this is how we act towards others. It is what we call foreign policy. Well, guess what? We don’t have one. This is strange, isn’t it? We have as many foreign policies as we have Member States, and maybe even more. Thanks, you’re right. Maybe this is the reason why our foreign policy weight is way, way, way smaller than our economic weight. This is not good for us because economic policy and foreign policy have to go hand in hand. So we should work on these two: extension and foreign policy. Now, the elections are upcoming. Each of you is going to fight for a seat or a principle or a value. That’s correct. Every party comes up with concepts, with ideas, with policies. You will accuse each other of being, well, the wrong guys. You will fight for as many votes as possible. That’s absolutely fair. That’s the essence of democracy: campaigning, profiling, trying to be the best. Please do so. You sitting here are the best. This is why you sit here. But please, if you fight each other, don’t fight Europe. If you fight for votes against your opponents, still fight for European Union. And if you fight with the other party and tell them they are not the right guys, please do not fight against the European solidarity. Because without this we are doomed. So no matter who is winning – and I hope the best are winning – let us uphold our values, our principles, our unity, and our solidarity.
[EN] Roberta | Metsola said from the NULL that The debate is closed. Written statements (Rule 171)
[RO] Victor | Negrescu said from the S-D that în scris . – Beneficiile aderării României la UE sunt nenumărate și tangibile pentru români. De la aderarea la Uniunea Europeană până în prezent, România a înregistrat un sold pozitiv de peste 62 de miliarde de euro comparativ cu obligațiile sale financiare ca stat membru. Majoritatea investițiilor în școli, spitale, drumuri realizate pe plan național și local nu puteau fi făcute fără fonduri europene pentru că, atât instituțiile publice, cât și majoritatea companiilor private depind de existența acestor fonduri pentru dezvoltare. Totodată, sute de mii de români au avut acces la educație și formare profesională prin accesarea resurselor și oportunităților europene, în timp ce fermierii români au supraviețuit concurenței globale, beneficiind de subvențiile primite de la UE și accesând fonduri europene. Fie că vorbim despre dreptul la liberă circulație și piața internă europeană sau despre accesul la fonduri europene, securitate sau drepturi esențiale conferite de legislația europeană, România europeană de astăzi este mai puternică și mai sigură decât România de acum 17 ani.
